Article-A-Day All Things Animals! 6 Articles Check articles you have read: Bugging Out 319 words Tiger Tale 395 words Calling All Spiders! 684 words Good Chimp 325 words Protecting the Platypus 474 words The Ivory-Billed Woodpecker Returns 446 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 12 Bugging Out Bugging Out Sleepovers aren't fun when bed bugs are the guests! Bed bugs are tiny insects that feed on blood. In the United States, the critters have infested many places in New York City and other cities. In fact, many states across the country have major bed bug problems. The adult bugs are the size of apple seeds. They may be small, but they cause big trouble. "Bed bugs ... can travel far in search of a good meal," says scientist Jody Gangloff-Kaufmann. The insects can live in mattresses and couches. They come out at night to eat. While people sleep, the bugs drink their blood. The bites don't hurt, but they can cause itchy bumps. Those bumps have popped up all over the U.S. A rise in travel might be one reason. Travelers might carry the bugs in their suitcases. Using ineffective pesticides might also be an issue. Pesticides are chemicals that kill insects. Some pesticides may not be strong enough to get rid of bed bugs. Officials haven't taken the attacks lying down. New York made a law to prevent, or stop, renters from moving into apartments that have bed bugs. That state also passed a law making schools tell parents about bed bug sightings. "Getting the word out is a good idea," Gangloff-Kaufmann told WR News. "The best way to get rid of bed bugs starts with prevention," she says. Super Sniffers Got bed bugs? Dogs can tell! Experts have trained pooches to use their powerful noses to sniff out the insects. People's noses are too weak to find the scent. Dogs' noses are much stronger. The dogs can locate the insects in just a few minutes. Once pups find a bed bug, they sit down nearby. Then a pest control expert comes to get rid of the insects. Good dogs! ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 2 of 12 Tiger Tale Tiger Tale What dangers do the big cats face? Tigers rule! With their powerful bodies and sharp claws, the mighty cats run the jungle. However, the felines may not be large and in charge for long. A feline is a cat. Wild tigers could become extinct, or gone completely, according to experts. In 2010, only about 3,200 of the big cats were left in the wild in the world. That's a big change from 1910. Back then, about 100,000 wild tigers roamed the planet. One threat, or danger, the felines face is habitat loss. Tigers live in Asia. Loggers there cut down trees in the forests to make paper and other items people buy. Less forest means less room for the animals to roam and search for food. Another threat is poaching. That is illegal hunting. Tigers are poached for their fur and bones. In 2010, officials roared to action to help save the big cats. World leaders met to discuss the felines' future. "[Saving the] tigers is a very important issue," said Suwit Khunkitti. He was an official from Thailand. That is a country in Asia where tigers live. The leaders set a goal to double the number of wild tigers by 2022. They put together a plan to help protect the animals. One of their first steps is to make people aware of the dangers the cats face, explains Barney Long. He is a wildlife expert. Leaders also planned ways to stop poachers. "If we can solve these problems, the future is very, very bright [for tigers]," Long told WR News. In April 2016, it was reported that the wild tiger population increased to about 3,900 wild tigers. This was the first increase after decades of decline. Tiger Trivia These big cats are some of the fastest, largest, and strongest felines in the wild. Read to learn more about tigers. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 3 of 12 Tiger Tale Hungry Hunters Running through the jungle makes tigers work up an appetite. They can eat up to 88 pounds of meat at a time. One of a Kind Each cat's stripes are unique, like human fingerprints. No two tigers have the same pattern. Sleepyheads Don't let their size fool you. Even adult tigers can sleep like babies. They spend up to 18 hours a day in dream land. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 4 of 12 Calling All Spiders! Calling All Spiders! Does thinking about spiders and their hairy bodies, long legs, and sticky webs make your skin crawl? Many people shiver at the thought of spiders. That is not the case for Rich Bradley, a real-life Spider-Man. He can't get enough of the creepy crawlers. Bradley is a biologist. One of the things he studies is spiders. Bradley has spent many years identifying and studying spiders in his home state of Ohio. Spider Seekers Bradley has uncovered hundreds of species, or types, of spiders living in Ohio. He and his team of volunteers had a sharp eye when it came to collecting the creatures indoors and outdoors. "They move really fast," he told Weekly Reader. As of 2022, scientists say about 4,000 species of spiders live in North America, and nearly 49,000 live worldwide. Spiders live in different places, including gardens, water, deserts, and caves. Hairy Hunters Many people think spiders are insects, but they are actually arachnids (ah-RAK-nidz). Ticks and scorpions are also arachnids. Along with fangs and eight hairy legs, a spider has two body parts--a head and an abdomen. The abdomen contains spinnerets, organs that produce silk. A spider uses its silk for many purposes, including weaving webs, protecting its eggs, and catching food. Spiders are predators, or hunters that eat other animals. They dine mostly on insects. Some larger spiders also eat lizards, frogs, and even snakes. To capture their food, some spiders spin webs. Other types of spiders chase down their prey. The venom, or poison, from their fangs helps paralyze their food. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 5 of 12 Calling All Spiders! Fear Factor Although the hairy creatures spook many people, there isn't much reason to be afraid of spiders. "Most spiders are not very dangerous," said Bradley. In fact, most are timid creatures that are unable to give humans more than a harmless bite. Although spider venom is deadly to insects, it often has little effect on humans because of our larger size. Myth-Conceptions Spiders may have a bad reputation for being scary, but they are important to us. Bradley hopes his work shatters some myths about spiders. (A myth is a false idea that many people believe is true. ) Spiders eat mosquitoes and other insects that harm farmers' crops and carry diseases. Bradley's research is teaching scientists more about how spiders help control ecosystems, or communities of plants and animals. If spiders didn't exist, there would be a lot more insects! "Spiders are your friends," Bradley said. "They make our life more pleasant." Spider Mania Get caught up on some different types of spiders. Spiders come in all shapes and sizes. Crab spiders, jumping spiders, and orb weavers have all been part of Rich Bradley's work in Ohio. Find out more about them and other spiders. á Crab Spider Can you guess how this spider got its name? It may not live in the ocean, but it looks like a crab. The crab spider lives on flowers. It can match its body color to the flower's color. That allows it to sneak up on insects. á Jumping Spider ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 6 of 12 Calling All Spiders! What a leap! The jumping spider can jump between 10 and 40 inches. To catch an insect, this hunting spider sneaks up on its prey and pounces. á Trapdoor Spider The trapdoor spider lives in a tunnel. The spider, common in the southwestern United States, lines the tunnel with silk and fashions a door made of silk and dirt. It peeks out of the slightly open door and grabs passing insects. á Tarantula The tarantula is a large, hairy spider found mainly in warm regions, including the southwestern United States. Although the tarantula's bite is painful, it is not very harmful to humans. Tarantulas hunt insects, lizards, mice, toads, and frogs. á Orb-Weaving Spider E. B. White's famous spider Charlotte, from Charlotte's Web, was an orb weaver. The orbweaving spider spins a wheel-shaped web. When an insect flies into the web, the spider races toward its meal. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 7 of 12 Good Chimp Good Chimp Everyone knows helping others is a good thing - maybe even chimpanzees, or chimps for short! In 2007, scientists studied chimps from Uganda. Uganda is a country in Africa. The scientists did tests that show that chimps often help people or other chimps, even if they get nothing in return. A Helping Hand In one test, a person dropped a stick near a group of chimps. In most cases, a chimp handed the stick back to the person. Chimps cared about other chimps too. In another test, a chimp handed over the stick when another chimp dropped it. The animals did not receive food or praise for their actions in either test. Born to Be Helpful? The results surprised the scientists. They had long thought that humans are the only animals that help others. "We've never seen this level ... of cooperation in any other animals except humans," said chimp scientist Alicia Melis. Cooperation means working together. Scientists say the study suggests that chimps and humans may be born with the ability to be helpful. So the saying "Kindness is its own reward" may not be true just for humans. Greet Some Great Apes Chimpanzees are a type of great ape. Great apes are the largest primates. Primates are a group of animals. Other great apes are gorillas, orangutans, and bonobos. The gorilla is the largest primate. A male gorilla can weigh as much as 500 pounds and stand up to 6 feet tall. Gorillas live in Africa. The chimpanzee uses tools more than any other animal does - except humans. A chimp might use a stone to crack a nut. Chimps live in Africa. The orangutan has very long arms. That's because it lives mostly in trees, swinging on branches. Orangutans live in Indonesia, a country in Asia. The bonobo is the smallest great ape. It can weigh up to 100 pounds. Bonobos are sometimes called "little chimps." Bonobos live in Africa. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 8 of 12 Protecting the Platypus Protecting the Platypus It was cold at Camp Platypus. The residents of the makeshift encampment huddled, drink steaming cups of tea, and warmed themselves over a wood fire. It was here, along the Obi Obi Creek in Australia, that protesters tried to stop builders from digging up a platypus habitat to build a supermarket. A habitat is the environment in which an animal lives. For several years the protesters battled with police, construction workers, and officials from the supermarket chain. In summer 2005 the situation grew more intense as workers began clearing the land. "We're not moving until we save this place," protester John Woodlands told a reporter. Odd Duck Why all the fuss about the platypus? Although the platypus is far from rare, it lives only on the continent of Australia. The animal is an endangered species and is protected under Australian law. It is also a weird-looking critter. When European explorers reached Australia in the 1600s and 1700s, they first saw this animal with a furry coat, a duck-like bill, four webbed feet, and a flat tail like a paddle. The animal uses its front limbs for swimming. Its tail functions as a rudder. The platypus acts like an amphibian, at home both on land and in the water. But the platypus is not an amphibian. It is a mammal. Mammals are warm-blooded animals. Most mammals, such as humans, produce milk. Specifically, the platypus is a mammal known as a monotreme. Unlike most mammals, monotremes lay eggs and provide milk to their young directly through the skin. Only two monotremes exist: the platypus and the echidna (ih-KIDnah), or spiny anteater. The platypus lives along the banks of eastern Australia's lakes, rivers, ponds, and streams. It uses its bill and its nose to sniff out food at the bottom of the waterways. Its large, flat, furry tail stores fat for the long winters. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 9 of 12 Protecting the Platypus Pollution is killing off the species, and the construction of homes and commercial buildings is destroying its habitat. Construction Proceeds At Camp Platypus, protesters hoped the supermarket chain would rethink its decision to build the store, but that proved unlikely. Construction was completed. Many protesters promised never to shop at the store. Nevertheless, although the platypus is an odd-looking creature, it still has a lot of friends around the world. Platypus Fast Facts Scientific name: Ornithorhynchus anatinus Habitat: Streams, rivers, and lakes near the east coast of Australia Description: Short, dense dark-brown fur; 2-inch-wide bill; hairless, webbed feet; flat, furry tail; 1- to 2-foot-long body Defense: Males have spurs on their hind feet that contain poisonous venom. The animal's sting can kill a dog. Reproduction: Females generally lay two eggs at a time. Babies attach themselves to the fur under a mother's belly to drink her milk. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 10 of 12 The Ivory-Billed Woodpecker Returns The Ivory-Billed Woodpecker Returns For more than 50 years, scientists thought the ivory-billed woodpecker was extinct in the United States. But in 2005, scientists announced that they have evidence that the bird still exists in eastern Arkansas. The scientists caught the black-and-white birds in flight on a blurry videotape. The sighting was made by University of Arkansas researcher David Luneau. Luneau was paddling on the Cache River when he accidentally left a video camera running as his canoe drifted through a bayou. The camera recorded an ivory-billed woodpecker. "We were nearing the end of a long day," Luneau says. "As we came around the bend in the channel, I cut the motor off, raised it to its locked position, and reached for my paddle. When I looked up, I saw the tail end of a black-and-white bird flying away." It wasn't until 11 months later that scientists looked at the video frame by frame. What they saw astounded them. They had found the ivory-billed woodpecker. A Majestic Bird The rare woodpecker began to disappear as loggers cut down the forests where the birds lived between 1880 and the 1940s. The last time anyone saw the bird was in 1944. The ivory-bill is the largest woodpecker in the United States. The spectacular red-crested bird has white patches on its huge wings. Its wingspan extends almost 3 feet. The bird's call sounds like the toot of a tin horn. Ivory-bills are also known for their one-of-a-kind sound made when their long bills strike wood. They produce a double knock when their beaks strike trees as they look for insects. Convincing Evidence Some skeptical scientists were not convinced that the woodpecker Luneau had accidentally photographed was an ivory-billed woodpecker. Some critics said the bird was instead a pileated woodpecker, which looks much like the ivory-bill. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 11 of 12 The Ivory-Billed Woodpecker Returns For people who doubted the videotape, scientists collected more proof. They recorded the ivory-billed woodpecker's double knock. The recording made believers out of the doubters. "Hearing [the recording] was very exciting!" Richard Prum, a scientist from Yale University, told Senior Edition. "[It is] convincing evidence the ivory-billed woodpecker is not extinct." Now that the ivory-bill is soaring again, a number of things are being done to make sure the bird doesn't really become extinct. Nature lovers are cutting down some trees in a select area of Arkansas. Why? The woodpeckers feed on young beetles that thrive under the bark of fallen trees. With more food for the woodpeckers, bird lovers hope the ivorybill's double knock will become a common sound again. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 12 of 12