Article-A-Day Different Kinds of Birds 6 Articles Check articles you have read: Facts about Northern Saw-whet Owls 205 words Facts about Downy Woodpeckers 243 words Peregrine Falcon 619 words Facts about Tufted Puffins 224 words Black Swift 323 words Green Jay 277 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 8 Facts about Northern Saw-whet Owls Facts about Northern Saw-whet Owls This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. The smallest of the eastern owls at about seven inches tall, the northern saw-whet owl has a cat-like face, an oversized head, and bright yellow eyes. Females are normally larger than males. á They roost in dense evergreens, forests, or thickets where their feathers provide camouflage. When threatened, the saw-whet owl can elongate its body to look like a tree branch or bump, sometimes bringing one wing around to the front of its body. á Their call is a series of toots or whistles. During breeding season, the call may last for several hours without a break. If the owl is scared, it will emit a sharp call that sounds like the whetting or sharpening of a saw. á These owls are strictly nocturnal, hunting at dusk and dropping from perches onto prey on the ground. A saw-whet owl may kill several mice in quick succession and hide excess food in safe places. A male may offer his catch to a female during breeding season. á Saw-whet owls are one of the most common owls across northern North America, but because they are active almost exclusively at night, they are rarely seen. á Some national wildlife refuges offer "owl prowls." ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 2 of 8 Facts about Downy Woodpeckers Facts about Downy Woodpeckers This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. The adult downy woodpecker is the smallest woodpecker in North America and can be found year-round just about everywhere except the arid southwest. It is about the size of a half a submarine sandwich - 5.5 to seven inches long. It usually weighs less than a pound. á Males feed high in trees; females feed lower on the tree. They form pairs by taking turns drumming on dead limbs. á Males and females work together to dig out a nest cavity in a dead limb or tree at last a foot off the ground. The birds camouflage the entrance with fungus or lichen. á The female lays four to five eggs. Both parents fill their bills with insects to feed the chicks. The young leave the nest about 20 to 25 days after hatching and may follow the parents around for a few weeks. á Downy woodpeckers visit parks and forests, orchards, wooded areas, bird, and suet feeders. They are often seen with nuthatches and chickadees. á Downy woodpeckers are noisy! They drum on trees during breeding season, and their call is a shrill whinny. á These woodpeckers have a long white stripe down their backs; it's the one bit of coloring that distinguishes them from hairy woodpeckers. The male has a small red patch on the back of his head. á The woodpeckers are very acrobatic. They hitch themselves down and around a tree trunk looking for insects and often balance on slender tree branches. ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 3 of 8 Peregrine Falcon Peregrine Falcon This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Up in the sky, look: It's a bird. It's a plane. It's Superman! No, we were right the first time. Definitely a bird, and most would agree it's a super bird. Meet the peregrine falcon. If you are impressed by animal records, you might already know about this falcon. When diving toward prey from great heights, this falcon attains tremendous speeds. Its combination of long, relatively narrow, pointed wings, streamlined shape, and strong chest muscles allow the bird to fly faster than any other bird. Just how fast is a subject of some debate. Technically speaking, the peregrine holds the record for fastest speed while diving, assisted by gravity. Other birds are recognized for being the fastest flying bird in level flight, or for completing long migratory flights faster than other species. Maximum speeds recorded range from 124 to 242 miles an hour. The 242 mph speed was recorded in 2005, when a falconer measured the speed of his pet falcon in an experiment. Whether they're the fastest animals on the planet or not, most people are thrilled to see them in the wild. The subspecies nesting in the continental United States was nearly extirpated by the eggshell-thinning effects of the pesticide DDT about 60 years ago, and the bird landed on the Endangered Species List in 1970. The nationwide ban of DDT in 1973, coupled with a very focused and passionate reintroduction effort, resulted in one of the most successful recoveries in the history of the Endangered Species Act. In 1999, the peregrine falcon was removed from the list, and populations have continued to increase slowly since that time. Equally at home nesting and feeding in rural cliffs and canyons or in urban habitats with tall buildings and bridges, the handsome falcons are welcome sights to bird watchers and conservationists alike. Peregrine Falcon Data á Size and color - 15 to 21 inches long, with a 40-inch wingspan. Peregrine falcons are the size of a crow, with a dark blue to slate gray back, white throat, black facial markings, and spotted or barred belly. They have long, pointed wings and rapid wingbeats. á Range - Historically, they were most common in parts of the Appalachian Mountains and ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 4 of 8 Peregrine Falcon nearby valleys from New England south to Georgia, the upper Mississippi River Valley, and the Rocky Mountains. Peregrines also inhabited the Pacific Coast from Mexico north to Alaska and in the Arctic Tundra. Most Peregrines from northern Alaska, Canada, and Greenland migrate in the fall to Central and South America, stopping at U.S. coastlines along the way to hunt for shorebirds, wading birds, waterfowl, and other birds. Peregrines that breed south of Canada migrate lesser distances, or not at all. á Diet - Primarily birds, including songbirds, shorebirds, ducks, and - in urban areas - starlings and pigeons á U.S. habitat - Mountain ranges, river valleys, coastlines, wetlands and open areas, and urban areas See This Bird! Although not considered common in any location, this falcon breeds in about 40 states and is reported by birders and biologists from every state annually. There are several national wildlife refuges where you can look for nesting, resting, migrating, or wintering peregrines. á Cape Meares National Wildlife Refuge - A pair of peregrine falcons has nested on the refuge since 1987. A wildlife viewing deck at Cape Meares State Scenic Viewpoint offers visitors a glimpse into the eyrie, or nest site, of the falcon pair from early April through July. á Sacramento National Wildlife Refuge - Look for falcons in the winter in search of waterfowl and other bird prey. á Cape May National Wildlife Refuge - One of the best places to see peregrines during fall migration, with peak numbers appearing during late September and early October. [...] ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 5 of 8 Facts about Tufted Puffins Facts about Tufted Puffins This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Tufted puffins are seabirds that thrive in the open waters, islands, and coasts of the North Pacific, from Japan through the Aleutian Islands and south from Oregon to southern California. á As soon as [a] chick is fully grown, parents leave the chick to fend for itself. á They winter on the open ocean, "flying" below the waves to catch small fish and invertebrates. á Tufted puffins are silent except for some low growling around their nests. á Using their webbed feet, tufted puffins dig burrows up to six feet long in the soil or in natural rock crevices. The tunnel ends in a grass- and feather-lined nest with one egg. Males and females can hold from five to 20 fish crosswise in their bill to carry food to their young. á Tufted puffins are threatened by plastic debris, gill-nets, reduction in their prey, and invasive predators that invade their burrows. Since the mid-1990s, tufted puffin populations in Oregon and Washington have dropped more than 95 percent. á Prime spots to view these birds are Face Rock in Bandon, Oregon, and Haystack Rock in Cannon Beach, which has the largest breeding population of tufted puffins. The best viewing time is May to August, when colonies of nesting puffins can be seen along the entire Oregon Coast, especially in the Oregon Islands National Wildlife Refuge. ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 6 of 8 Black Swift Black Swift This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. An enigmatic bird local to the western United States, the black swift is highly sought after by birders. Swifts fly very fast (the white-throated swift is considered the speediest songbird), foraging all day for insects, and building inaccessible nests. The black swift flies very high in the sky near mountainous habitats, and only 80 nest sites (behind or near waterfalls) have been found in their breeding range from southeast Alaska through Central America. It's no wonder the species is considered puzzling because of these behaviors and the limited viewing opportunity. Like many refuges, Lee Metcalf National Wildlife Refuge, MT, offers birders a unique and quality birding opportunity - perhaps even seeing a black swift. The best chances come during inclement weather in late May through mid-June, when there is a low cloud ceiling, light rain, and cool temperatures in the 50s/60s [Fahrenheit]. Under these circumstances the high-flying black swift comes "back to Earth" to forage for insects at lower elevations. As a bonus - thanks in part to geography and habitat - Vaux's and White-throated swifts can also be found and identified at Lee Metcalf Refuge, sometimes right from the back door of the refuge headquarters! [...] Black Swift Data: á Size - The black swift is about seven inches long with an 18-inch wingspan; it is the largest swift in the United States and Canada. Black overall with a pale gray head, it has a forked tail and can appear to have long wings when flying. á Range - The black swift is found from the Arctic to Central America and in the West Indies. In North America, its breeding range extends from southeastern Alaska to southern California, Montana, Colorado, Utah, and New Mexico. á Diet - flying insects á Habitat - The black swift is primarily a mountainous species, nesting on canyon walls near water and sheltered by overhanging rock or moss. Lays one to two eggs. ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 7 of 8 Green Jay Green Jay This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Quick - how many medium-sized, green, wild birds have you seen flying around your neighborhood recently? If your answer is zero, don't worry - they're even hard to find in a standard North American field guide. Except for hummingbirds, true green birds of any size are uncommon in the United States. By far the most colorful of the North American jays, the green jay is often high on the list for beginning birders. As brightly colored as they are, these birds can be surprisingly hard to see in subtropical woodlands, their two-toned greens and yellows blending into the leafy tree canopies they inhabit. Jays, crows, and ravens are corvids, widely known as intelligent birds that live in most areas of the United States. The jays come in many colors, and can be common in many different habitats, from remote wilderness areas to backyard feeders. Green Jay Data: á Size - similar to the more widespread blue jay, [California scrub jay, and Woodhouse's scrub jay] á Range - extreme south Texas á Diet - mainly insects, [and] also seeds, fruits, and small vertebrates á U.S. habitat - dense and open woodland, brushy thickets, home territory for family unit averages 40 acres See This Bird! Although their U.S. range is quite limited, there are several National Wildlife Refuges where green jays are common. They often visit feeders in fall and winter, and feast on citrus fruits offered by refuge staff and volunteers. While nothing can be guaranteed in the world of bird watching, these Texas refuges offer good chances to observe and hear green jays: á Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge á Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge á Lower Rio Grande Valley National Wildlife Refuge [...] ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 8 of 8