Article-A-Day Birds that Live Near Water 7 Articles Check articles you have read: Black Oystercatcher 302 words Roseate Spoonbill 344 words Great Blue Heron 592 words Long-Billed Curlew 332 words Wilson's Phalarope 363 words Common Tern 361 words Piping Plover 360 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 11 Black Oystercatcher Black Oystercatcher This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. As its name suggests, the black oystercatcher has a particular taste for shellfish, and settles its nest along rocky shorelines. While it eats mainly mollusks, it hardly ever eats actual oysters, instead opting for mussels and limpets. In most cases the oystercatcher will never leave its home, and will raise its young in the same place it winters - an oddity among shorebirds. Generally mating for life and [reusing] the same nest, the black oystercatcher is a true homebody with a lifespan up to 15 years. With about 11,000 birds in the wild, mostly concentrated around the Alaskan coast, the black oystercatcher is especially vulnerable to oil spills. Black oystercatchers are territorial by nature, and fiercely protect their chosen nesting grounds. Black Oystercatcher Data á Size and color - 16.5 to 18.5 inches in height, weighing about 17.6 to 24.7 ounces, with a wingspan of 28 to 36 inches. Northernmost oystercatchers are solidly black, while some show lighter markings as they are seen [farther] south. Large red bill, solid yellow eyes, and thick, pink legs. á Range - Found along coastline between Aleutian Islands and Baja California yearround. á Diet - Forages in shallow intertidal areas for mollusks, especially mussels and limpets, but also crabs and barnacles. á U.S. habitat - Prefers rocky sea coasts and islands, and makes nests on rocks above the high tide line. See [This] Bird! á Oregon Islands National Wildlife Refuge, OR - Offshore rocky coastlines are closed to the public year-round to minimize disturbances to shorebirds. Viewing areas around the refuge allow visitors to see oystercatchers. á Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge, AK - Almost 40 million seabirds nest on Alaska Maritime Refuge lands, more bird traffic than any other area in North America. ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 2 of 11 Roseate Spoonbill Roseate Spoonbill This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Think pink! Just getting started with bird watching? Even beginning bird watchers should have little difficulty identifying this spectacular bird! Look for a large, shocking-pink bird with an enormous spoon-shaped bill in Florida, Louisiana, and Texas coastal wetlands. These social birds are usually found in groups, and nest communally in trees near water. During breeding season the pink plumage ratchets up a few notches for nesting adults, much to the delight of birders and photographers. Once nearly extirpated in the U.S. due to rookery disturbance and demand for feathers in the ladies hat trade of the 1800s and 1900s, it has recovered somewhat and can be found in suitable habitat in several Gulf [Coast] states. Spoonbills use their long, curiously-shaped bills to feed in an interesting manner. They wade through shallow waters with their bill tips (the "spoon" part) slightly open, heads swaying from side to side, ready to snap their bills shut when they feel prey such as fish and aquatic invertebrates, which they catch almost entirely by their sense of touch. Roseate Spoonbill Data: á Size - Stand about 31 inches tall, with a 32-inch-long body, 6.5-inch bill, 52-inch wingspan. Average weight is 3.3 pounds. á Breeding Range - Nov. - Aug., mostly along the coast in FL, LA, and TX á Non-breeding Range - disperses from nesting areas within breeding states and into nearby states, often far inland and occasionally many hundreds of miles from the Gulf [Coast] á Diet - mostly fish, crustaceans, and insects á U.S. habitat - feeds and breeds in a variety of freshwater, brackish, and marine environments. Nests mostly over water in trees or shrubs, often on islands. See [It] for Yourself While nothing can be guaranteed in the world of bird watching, roseate spoonbills can be ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 3 of 11 Roseate Spoonbill common in the proper season and habitat at these refuges: á Ten Thousand Islands National Wildlife Refuge, FL á J.N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge, FL á Sabine National Wildlife Refuge, LA á Laccasine National Wildlife Refuge, LA á Brazoria National Wildlife Refuge, TX á Anahuac National Wildlife Refuge, TX ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 4 of 11 Great Blue Heron Great Blue Heron This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Often incorrectly called a crane, to which they are not related, or an egret, which is in the same family (rather like a second cousin), great blue herons are widely distributed throughout the continental United States. These patient predators stalk a wide variety of wetland prey near ponds, streams, lakes, rivers, marshes, and coastlines, spearing and swallowing whole everything from fish to frogs to snakes to rodents. Although they typically hunt solo, they often nest together in trees in groups called rookeries. These large wading birds stand nearly four feet tall, and have 72-inch wingspans. Adult males and females are similar in size and color. So how can you tell great blue herons and other herons and egrets from sandhill and whooping cranes? Although sandhill cranes are roughly the same size, most field guides and bird experts note that herons, except in rookeries, are solitary animals, whereas the crane is more social and can be found in large flocks outside of breeding season. Herons usually stand and fly with their long necks in an S-shape; cranes fly with straight necks, in V-shaped flocks during migration. Great blue herons are not very vocal and are more frequently found near wetlands, while sandhill cranes vocalize often and can be found in many open habitats, from marshes to farm fields to suburban yards and golf courses. Great Blue Heron Data á Size and color - 45 to 54" tall, weighing between 4.5 and 7 lbs., with 72-inch wingspans. Males and females look similar: medium blue-gray overall color, long legs and neck, large dagger-like yellow bill, and a black and white head. If you're in coastal southern Florida, be on the lookout for an all-white subspecies that looks a lot like a great egret. á Range - Year-round or summer residents, or migrants, in most of the continental United States, usually in close proximity to open water and wetlands. á Diet - Primarily small fish, but will feed on many kinds of aquatic and terrestrial prey, including reptiles and amphibians, rodents and small mammals, shrimp and crabs, birds, and insects. á U.S. habitat - A wide variety of wetland habitats, including ponds and lakes, streams and ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 5 of 11 Great Blue Heron rivers, mangrove swamps, and freshwater and saltwater marshes and bays. Equally at home in rural and urban locations, wherever minimal cover exists along with a good supply of fish and other prey. See This Bird! Their range is quite restricted in Alaska, and they are a rare visitor to Hawaii, but quite easy to find in the lower 48. To see breeding and nesting behaviors, it's worth a special trip to a heron rookery in the spring. There are several national wildlife refuges where you can look for nesting herons: á Missisquoi National Wildlife Refuge in Vermont - Home to the largest great blue heron rookery in the state, this rookery on Shad Island (closed to public entry) can only be observed by canoe or kayak. á Horicon National Wildlife Refuge in Wisconsin - Home to Horicon Marsh, the largest freshwater cattail marsh in the nation, which is not surprisingly home to the largest colony of nesting great blue herons in Wisconsin. á Mason Neck National Wildlife Refuge in Virginia - With more than 1,400 nests, the great blue heron rookery here is one of the largest in the region. á Hagerman National Wildlife Refuge in Texas - View the rookery here in the month of April, but with good habitat and open water found in every season, great blue herons are common here year-round. [...] ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 6 of 11 Long-Billed Curlew Long-Billed Curlew This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Looking for large shorebirds with long, curved bills but don't live near the beach? If you happen to live in the northwestern United States, you might be in luck. Hundreds and even a thousand miles from the coast, these cool birds spend parts of each spring and summer on short- and mixed-grass habitats, nesting far from the ocean. From the tip of the bill to the tip of the tail, long-billed curlews are about as long as Swainson's hawks, which share similar breeding territories and [habitats]. The incredibly long, decurved (curving down) bill enables this largest member of the sandpiper family to probe deep into the soil for earthworms and other invertebrates on summer grassland habitats, and into burrows on tidal mudflats in search of shrimp and crabs when wintering along the coast of south Texas and Mexico. [Long-Billed] Curlew Data: á Size - Female bills average 6.7 inches long, [and] males average 5.5 inches. Females (avg. 2.26 lbs.) are larger than males (avg. 1.53 lbs. ). á Breeding Range - selected grassland habitats in several states (CA, NV, UT, OR, WA, MT, ID, WY, MT, CO NE, ND, SD, NM, and very small sections of OK and TX) á Winter Range - most common in Imperial Valley of California, southern California, west Texas and eastern New Mexico, and gulf coast of Texas á Diet - mostly insects, crustaceans, and small invertebrates á U.S. habitat - summer and winter: short-growth grasslands, mixed shrub-savannah; winter: coastal tidal mudflats See [It] for Yourself! While nothing can be guaranteed in the world of bird watching, long-billed curlews can be common in the proper season and habitat at these refuges: Mid-April through Mid-August á Ruby Lake National Wildlife Refuge, NV á Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge, UT ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 7 of 11 Long-Billed Curlew á Red Rocks Lake National Wildlife Refuge, MT á Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, OR á Crescent Lake National Wildlife Refuge, NE During the winter: á San Luis National Wildlife Refuge, CA á Brazoria National Wildlife Refuge, TX á Lower Rio Grande Valley National Wildlife Refuge, TX ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 8 of 11 Wilson's Phalarope Wilson's Phalarope This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Phalaropes are sandpipers that forage on the water's surface while swimming, often spinning in one spot. Fall shorebird migration starts around the 4th of July and continues into September. Shorebirds like Wilson's phalarope are known for concentrating in large groups during migration. Gray and white like most other shorebirds in the fall, it is the largest and most likely phalarope species to be seen in the continental U.S. Phalaropes are a unique group of birds: females are larger and more colorful than males, which are smaller and duller in coloration. Viewing spectacles (numbering 500,000 or more) are somewhat restricted to hypersaline lakes of the west, such as Great Salt Lake, Utah, a designated Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve. Bear River National Wildlife Refuge, in the northwest corner of this lake, is a good place to observe this species. Watch for birds spinning in a circle (up to 60 rotations/minute) in shallow water, thought to stir up food lodged in the mud. The name "phalarope" means coot-foot in Greek; these birds have partially webbed [toes] that enable them to spin on water surfaces, creating whirlpools that gather aquatic prey for easy picking. Brine shrimp and brine flies are the primary aquatic invertebrates that these phalaropes eat. Body fat powers these birds on a 56-hour flight from the Pacific Ocean to wintering areas in the [high-altitude] lakes in the Andean Mountains of South America. Wilson's Phalarope Data á Size and Color - [Females are] about 9.5 inches; [males are] smaller; [their weight is] about two ounces with a wingspan [of] about 17 inches. Females may [weigh] 40 percent more than males. Fall coloring is gray and white. [Females in spring have] black and chestnut neck stripes and a white head. [Wilson's phalaropes have longer bills] than other phalaropes. Juveniles are scaly brown. á Range - In the summer, phalaropes are common in the upper northwest U.S. [They range] from Canada to South America during migration. á Diet - aquatic invertebrates such as brine shrimp and flies á U.S. Habitat - prairie marshes [and] western lakes See This Bird! á Bear River National Wildlife Refuge, Utah á Bombay Hook National Wildlife Refuge, Delaware á Stillwater National Wildlife Refuge, Nevada ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 9 of 11 Common Tern Common Tern This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. It may look like your average seagull, but don't expect the common tern to steal your snacks at the beach. The common tern, similar in size and shape to a seagull, is a hunter and fish-lover above all, and prefers diving from up to 50 feet in the air instead of waiting for you to drop a chip. Occupying coastlines from North Carolina up into Canada, and west into the Rocky Mountains, the common tern migrates to the coasts of Central and South America during the winter. While predominantly found near oceans, common terns will also nest along lakes and rivers, as long as the climate remains temperate and vegetation remains scarce. Common terns have straight, pointed, brightly-colored beaks. They also have a black-colored cap and nape, which stands out against its bright white plumage. Common Tern Data á Size and color - 12 to 14 inches tall, weighing between four to five ounces, with 30 to 39 inch wingspans. With no significant difference between the sexes, adult terns have grey-to-white plumage, white tail feathers, and orange-to-black legs and beaks. á Range - Spends summers on northern coastlines above North Carolina. Winters in Central and South America. Found year-round in Cuba. á Diet - Common terns mainly eat small fish in oceans, lakes, or rivers. They may also eat some invertebrates, such as worms, leeches, mollusks, and crustaceans. á U.S. habitat - Near fresh or saltwater, mainly islands, marshes, and beaches. See This Bird! á Mille Lacs National Wildlife Refuge, MN - Host to one of only five breeding populations of common tern in Minnesota, Lake Mille Lacs' abundance of minnows provides ample food for the birds. Hennepin Island, in the center of the lake, also provides security from mainland predators. The islands are closed to the public, but boating is permitted in the surrounding lake. á Nantucket National Wildlife Refuge, MA - Common terns enjoy the safety of Nantucket's many rocky coastal islands, and have grown fiercely territorial toward predators. á Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge, OH - Found along the marshy areas of the refuge where low-lying pools of water provide an easy hunting ground. ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 10 of 11 Piping Plover Piping Plover This text is from the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Named for its full, melodic tone, the piping plover is unique to North America, and despite widespread habitat loss, can be found on stretches of sandy beach all across the Atlantic coast. With only an estimated 8,000 adult piping plovers left in the world, the tiny bird is the subject of conservation efforts in several Atlantic states. The piping plover can most likely be found foraging along sandy ground for insects. Once hatched, young plovers typically leave the nest within just a few days, with very little parental supervision. The piping plover must make up for its small size by being resourceful. One of the greatest threats to the piping plover is beach litter, which attracts small mammals such as raccoons. With little natural defense against such predators, plovers have disappeared in large numbers due to interferences in their habitat. Piping Plover Data á Size and color - 6.7 to 7.1 inches tall, weighing between 1.5 and 2.2 ounces, with a wingspan of about 15 inches. Piping plovers sport a black ring around their necks that contrasts with their otherwise off-white and sand-colored plumage. They have short yellow beaks and [legs]. á Range - In summer, plovers are found along the Atlantic coast, mainly above North Carolina. A second population nests along the banks of the Great Lakes. In winter, the plovers migrate along the Gulf Coast. á Diet - Mainly small invertebrates, including insects, worms, crustaceans, mollusks, and the eggs of other beach species. á U.S. habitat - Piping plovers prefer sparsely-vegetated, widely-expansive sandy areas where their plumage is similar to the color of sand. See [This] Bird! á Lostwood National Wildlife Refuge, ND - Plovers nest in the wetlands of the refuge beginning in early April each year. á Parker River National Wildlife Refuge, [MA] - As a popular mid-March nesting ground for plovers, the local beach is closed to humans to leave the birds undisturbed, leaving a small viewing section on the northern bank open. á Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge, [NC] - The refuge's low-lying waters and salt flats allow piping plovers ample hunting grounds year-round. ReadWorks.org This article from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has no known copyright restrictions. Page 11 of 11