How to Band Birds How to Band Birds Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. From songbirds in cities to shorebirds on the beach, everyone has seen a bird. But some people, such as researchers, take time and put in effort to study birds closely. One of the ways researchers study birds is through banding. Banding has nothing to do with guitars and drum sets. Instead, bird banding is when researchers place a special band on birds' legs. Bird banding has been used to study wild birds for more than 100 years! Birds like to visit and live in areas that have good food and a safe place to rest. They look for areas with trees and bushes. So when scientists want to study the birds in a certain area, they might set up a banding station there. Using special nets, researchers and volunteers gently catch the birds to learn more about them. The researchers carefully weigh and measure the birds and keep track of their species and gender. They also put the bands on each bird's leg. The small metal bands are lightweight. Each band has a different number on it. If the bird is ever caught again, researchers will know where the bird was found the first time. They'll also know if the bird has changed at all. Some researchers use tiny plastic bands in bright colors in addition to the metal bands. The bright colors can be seen from a distance. In the United States, the U.S. Geological Survey manages the bird banding program for most of North America. So many birds migrate through the continent that Canada and Mexico agreed to be part of the U.S. program. Information collected through bird banding is shared with all the scientists and researchers in the three countries. The information that scientists have collected at banding stations helps us understand the flight patterns of different bird species. Scientists can describe the routes the birds take when they migrate. Thanks to banding, we are learning where and how long birds live. Researchers are also studying how bird size and migration routes may be changing. Because of programs that count and follow birds, researchers know that billions of birds have died over the past 50 years. Now that they are aware of this problem, scientists are trying to find out what is killing the birds and how to help them. The biggest problem for the birds is the loss of habitat. People cut down forests and remove the plants in fields to build homes and businesses. The birds have fewer places to rest when they travel. When they arrive at their former homes, there are no trees left to build their nests. ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. How to Band Birds For birds that nest on the ground, the loss of the fields means they have no home either. Climate change is another problem. Warmer temperatures are causing bigger storms, which might send migrating birds in the wrong direction. Big storms might also injure the birds. The warmer temperatures are also changing the growing season. Some plants are starting to bloom at earlier times. This may cause birds that migrate to miss their food source. Another problem for birds is lights from large cities. Lights can cause birds to crash into buildings and die. Some cities have started to schedule nights with "lights out" during migration seasons. Researchers are working to find other solutions to help the birds. Solving problems always starts with understanding the causes. By studying the birds and the problems they are facing, researchers hope to find ways to help birds thrive. ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 