Article-A-Day All About Butterflies 7 Articles Check articles you have read: Butterfly Gardening 130 words Winging It at School 157 words Flutter By, Butterfly 449 words A Butterfly's Life Cycle 142 words Four Common Butterflies 197 words Caterpillars 181 words A Butterfly's Body 180 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Articles generously provided by National Audubon Society are included. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Page 1 of 8 Butterfly Gardening Butterfly Gardening This text and images are provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. You can help butterflies-and other wildlife- make themselves more at home in your garden, schoolyard, or local park by growing the native plants that local butterflies use for food. Here are some tips to help get you started: á Attract butterflies by growing flowers rich in nectar. Native plants are the best choice. Include caterpillar plants! These are host plants on which butterflies can lay eggs. The caterpillars that hatch will eat them. Garden plants to include are cabbage, broccoli, carrot, dill, fennel, parsley, violets, and clover. á Include hiding places, such as dead leaves, brush piles, and woodpiles. Don't remove dead leaves, fallen branches, and flower stalks, since they might contain butterfly eggs, caterpillars, and over-wintering butterflies. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 2 of 8 Winging It at School Winging It at School This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. What do the Illinois town of Milan and forests of oyamel fir trees in Mexico have in common? Monarch butterflies! In 1997, students at the Coyne Center School in Milan worked with teachers to plant a butterfly garden on the school grounds. Seeds grew to create a lush patch filled with nectarrich verbena, sunflowers, and Indian blanket flowers. The garden also offered food plants such as milkweed for caterpillars. Every year since, kids have gathered eggs and caterpillars from the garden and observed as they changed into chrysalises. The butterflies are then released into the garden again. Monarch butterflies in the bunch are tagged with little stickers provided by a project called Monarch Watch, run by the University of Kansas at Lawrence. Monarch Watch uses the Internet to link researchers and volunteers in an effort to study monarch migration to Mexico. Kids at schools throughout the United States and Canada are part of this study, too. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 3 of 8 Flutter By, Butterfly Flutter By, Butterfly This text and image are provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. A midsummer day pours sunshine on a garden of colorful flowers. A flutter in the sky catches your eye. It's a butterfly, stitching its way through the air on paper-thin wings. Tiny scales on butterfly wings create colors and patterns that dazzle your eyes. But these lovely insects are not just nature's decorations. They play an important part in how an ecosystem works. A butterfly lays eggs only on certain kinds of plants, called "butterfly host plants," in its habitat. Usually these are native plants that have just the right combination of characteristics to help them survive in this particular habitat. The butterfly eggs hatch into caterpillars called larvae that eat the host plant. Without caterpillars to eat them, some plants can grow out of control. (And without native birds to eat some of the caterpillars, the plants wouldn't be able to survive all of those munching caterpillar jaws! ) A butterfly, however, does not eat leaves. It uses a tube-like tongue, called a proboscis, to suck up liquids such as flower nectar. As the butterfly sips nectar, its head and wings are dusted with pollen from the flower. When the butterfly drinks nectar from the next flower, some of the pollen falls off. The butterfly goes from flower to flower, drinking nectar and also spreading pollen. By pollinating flowers, butterflies help plants make seeds. Butterflies, flowers, caterpillars, birds ... they all have a role in keeping an ecosystem healthy. Many people are delighted by butterflies and even plant "butterfly gardens" to feed them. At the same time, however, human activity is harming butterfly habitat. In Oregon, for example, meadows near the seaside have been cleared to build houses, offices, and stores. This threatens the Oregon silverspot butterfly which lives only in coastal meadows where its host plant, the beautiful long-spurred violet, grows. Butterflies that migrate long distances, such as monarchs, face perils in more than one habitat. Many monarchs fly to Mexico's mountain forests for the winter. Logging in these forests not only removes trees that butterflies roost on but also removes nearby trees that shield them from cold winter winds. Human activity has also unleashed invasive nonnative plants into habitats where they never grew before. An invasive plant is one that crowds out other species. A nonnative plant can't "fit in" with the other plants and animals that share the habitat. So when a nonnative plant starts to spread, it usually means trouble. At first, butterflies may thrive in these unnatural habitats because the invasive plants offer lots of nectar. But when the native host plants that feed caterpillars are gone, the butterflies have nowhere to lay eggs. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 4 of 8 A Butterfly's Life Cycle A Butterfly's Life Cycle This text and images are provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Metamorphosis is the process of growing and changing that turns an egg into a caterpillar, a caterpillar into a chrysalis, and a chrysalis into a butterfly. These pictures show the metamorphosis of a monarch butterfly. 1. Female monarch lays egg on milkweed plant. 2. Caterpillar hatches. 3. Caterpillar eats its eggshell. 4. Caterpillar eats milkweed leaves. 5. Caterpillar makes silk pad on branch and attaches itself to the pad. 6. Caterpillar sheds its skin and turns into a chrysalis. 7. Butterfly emerges from its chrysalis skin. 8. Butterfly pumps liquid from its body into its wings. 9. Butterfly flies away to find nectar-and a mate. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 5 of 8 Four Common Butterflies Four Common Butterflies This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Viceroy The viceroy and the monarch benefit from the fact that they look so much alike. Both taste bad, so after a predator tastes one of them, it is likely to leave both of them alone! Can you spot some differences between the two species' wing patterns? Tailed Blue Look for these little blue butterflies in fields of clover. They don't have much of a tail-just tiny threads trailing from their hind wings. Mourning Cloak This dark butterfly creates a splash of color when sun shines on the lacy yellow edges of its wings. It usually lives in and near woods and along streams. It can live for nearly a year as an adult, spending the winter hiding under loose bark or in a woodpile. Cloudless Sulphur In summer, this is one of the many yellow butterflies called sulphurs that flock to fields where their host plants, clover and alfalfa, grow. Male sulphurs have sweet-smelling wings. Watch for them around mud puddles, where they sip up mineral-rich moisture. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 6 of 8 Caterpillars Caterpillars This text and image are provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. A caterpillar ripples across a wild carrot plant. It recently hatched from one of dozens of eggs laid on this plant many days before by its mother-a black swallowtail butterfly. There's a reason the caterpillar is on this plant. All butterflies need certain kinds of plants, and black swallowtails only lay eggs on plants related to wild carrots. When the caterpillar hatched, it was surrounded by the kind of leaves it needed for food. A caterpillar keeps eating and growing until it grows out of its skin. The skin splits and falls away, revealing a new skin underneath. The caterpillar sheds its skin four times as it grows. At last it spins a pad of silk on a plant stem, then spins fine silk threads that hold it on the pad. The caterpillar's skin breaks away one more time. Underneath, it has taken on a new shape, called a chrysalis. The soft chrysalis skin soon hardens. Inside, the caterpillar's body changes even more. Finally, the chrysalis splits open, and a new black swallowtail butterfly crawls out. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 7 of 8 A Butterfly's Body A Butterfly's Body This text and image are provided courtesy of the National Audubon society. A butterfly is an insect. Like all insects, it has three main body parts: head, thorax, and abdomen. It also has special butterfly adaptations. A butterfly sucks up liquid through its proboscis. It rolls the proboscis up when not in use. Knobbed antennae adorn a butterfly's head and help it sense smells. Tiny, overlapping scales on its wings give it color. Veins in the wings give them strength. The butterfly, like all insects, has six legs. Sensitive cells on its feet "taste" the plants on which it lands. A butterfly has big eyes and sharp vision to help it find flowers and a mate. It can see ultraviolet light and shades of color that we cannot! Some butterflies have long tails on their hind wings. These tails often have spots that look like eyes. Together, the eyespots and tails may look look like a head with antennae to a hungry bird. They fool the bird into pecking at the back end of the butterfly's wing instead of its head -giving the butterfly a chance to escape! ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 8 of 8