Crazy Camouflage Crazy Camouflage This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. If you were in the ocean, could you spot the mimic octopus, sea dragon, stonefish, or flounder? These marine animals all use camouflage (KAM-uh-flahj), the ability to blend in or resemble an element of the surroundings. Camouflage helps animals survive in different ways. Some animals use camouflage to help them sneak up on their prey. By the time an unsuspecting prey notices its disguised predator-CHOMP!-it's too late. Camouflage also helps some animals hide from their predators. They can instantly change the coloring and pattern on their skin if they need to hide against a different background. How does a flounder blend in with its environment? Some flounders have a kind of skin cells called chromatophores (krow-MAT-uh-forz). Chromatophores contain colors, or pigments, that can change the skin's appearance. These cells change because they get a message from the brain. When flounders swim near the surface to feed, their skin becomes almost see-through. This helps them avoid predators below them. When they swim near the bottom, their skin can imitate the different colors and textures found on the seafloor. They can look like sand one minute, and a rocky bottom the next! One scientist even put a flounder against a checkerboard to see what would happen. In less than a minute, the flounder's body started to resemble the black and white squares of the gameboard! ReadWorks.org © 2024 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Crazy Camouflage Why can't humans change their skin to match their surroundings? Unlike some lucky sea animals, humans cannot change the color or pattern of their skin. (If we could, Halloween would never be the same!) Like all mammals, humans have only a single chromatophore, called a melanophore, which contains a colored chemical called melanin (MEH-la-nuhn). Melanin causes the skin to darken and creates skin colors from pink to brown to black. It also protects the skin from the Sun's harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation. When the skin is exposed to the Sun , more melanin is produced. 