Article-A-Day Climate Change and the Oceans 6 Articles Check articles you have read: What Is Coral Bleaching? 246 words What Is Ocean Acidification? 361 words What Is Happening in the Ocean? 1177 words What Is Global Climate Change? 343 words How Do We Know the Climate Is Changing? 1060 words What Is the Big Deal with Carbon? 639 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 12 What Is Coral Bleaching? What Is Coral Bleaching? This text is from NASA's "Climate Kids." Coral bleaching? What's that? ! A reef is a big group of rocks on the ocean floor, but did you know that a coral reef is actually alive and covered with very small animals called corals? These animals glue their tiny skeletons to rocks, so they end up staying in the same place their entire lives! Coral reefs are very sensitive to light and temperature. If the water they live in gets too hot, they might not survive. They also don't like it when the ocean has too much pollution. Sometimes, storms can even upset coral depending on how often they happen and how severe they are. If coral reefs are under too much stress, like in these conditions, they can eject the algae living on them and turn completely white. This is known as coral bleaching. This does not necessarily mean the coral is dead - corals can survive bleaching! They do become more vulnerable to death however, especially if the stress continues for a long period of time. NASA recently developed some very sensitive instruments to study coral reefs from an airplane flying above the ocean. The COral Reef Airborne Laboratory (CORAL) uses an instrument called the Portable Remote Imaging Spectrometer (PRISM) to see the condition of reefs. Scientists will now be able to monitor these reefs and their health. They will be able to measure the amounts of coral, algae, and sand on the ocean floor! ReadWorks.org Page 2 of 12 What Is Ocean Acidification? What Is Ocean Acidification? This text is from NASA's "Climate Kids." Hold the acid, please! Try this: Taste plain water. Then taste sparkling water (carbonated water), with no flavoring. Besides the slight tickle or sting of the bubbles in the sparkling water, do you notice anything else? The sparkling water tastes just a little bit sour. The more bubbles, the more sour the water. The reason is that adding carbon dioxide to water is like adding a few drops of lemon juice. It makes the water a little acidic. In the past 200 years, the ocean has become much more acidic. In that time, it has absorbed 500 billion tons of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. It's hard to imagine that amount of a gas. But much of this carbon dioxide is the result of humans burning fossil fuels, like coal, gasoline, and jet fuel. Carbon dioxide is a powerful greenhouse gas. That means it acts as a glass roof on the atmosphere, letting sunlight in, but trapping heat so it can't escape. The ocean has soaked up more than one-quarter of the greenhouse gas that has built up in the atmosphere. If not for that great feature of the ocean, temperatures would have risen more than they already have. And even more of Earth's sea ice and glaciers would have melted. So, thank you, ocean! But wait. Just as some people like lemon juice in their water and some do not, creatures that live in the sea have their likes and dislikes about acidic water too. Mostly dislikes. Take baby oysters, for example. Along the Oregon coast, many are dying at only a few days old. That is because the ocean water is too acidic for them to form their shells. Other creatures already suffering from too much acid are some corals, and some other shellfish. Sea creatures with shells-like oysters, clams, and mussels-need the ocean to be a little less acidic than fresh water. That way, they can use the minerals in the water to make their shells. An acidic ocean is no better for ocean life than an atmosphere with too much carbon dioxide greenhouse gas is for land life! ReadWorks.org Page 3 of 12 What Is Happening in the Ocean? What Is Happening in the Ocean? This text is from NASA's "Climate Kids." This text has been adapted for use by ReadWorks. Why is the ocean important? After all, we live on land. But our world is a water world. The ocean covers 70% of Earth's surface. The average depth of the ocean is about 2.7 miles. In some places, the ocean is deeper than the tallest mountains are high! The ocean contains about 97% of all the water on Earth. The ocean plays a starring role in whatever happens with the environment. One big part of its role is to soak up energy (heat) and distribute it more evenly around the Earth. Another part is to soak up carbon dioxide. How does the ocean soak up energy? The ocean does an excellent job of absorbing excess heat from the atmosphere. The top few meters of the ocean stores as much heat as Earth's entire atmosphere. So, as the planet warms, it's the ocean that gets most of the extra energy. But if the ocean gets too warm, then the plants and animals that live in it must adapt-or die. Algae and plankton are at the bottom of the food chain. Plankton includes many different kinds of tiny animals, plants, or bacteria that just float and drift in the ocean. Other tiny animals such as krill (sort of like little shrimp) eat the plankton. Fish and even whales and seals feed on the krill. In some parts of the ocean, krill populations have dropped by over 80 percent. Why? Krill like to breed in really cold water near sea ice. What would happen if there were no sea ice? What would happen if there were very little plankton or krill? The whole food web could come unraveled. Coral is another ocean creature in trouble. Coral is a very fragile animal that builds a shell around itself. It lives in harmony with a certain kind of colorful algae. The algae make food using sunlight, a process called photosynthesis. They share the food with the coral, and, in turn, the coral gives the algae a safe and sunny place to live. The two of them get along fine, living in clean, clear, shallow waters where the Sun shines through brightly. Fish love coral too, because there are lots of nooks and crannies for them to hide in. ReadWorks.org Page 4 of 12 What Is Happening in the Ocean? But the algae cannot carry out photosynthesis in water that is too warm. The algae either die, or the coral spits it out. Scientists are not sure exactly what happens, but it's bad for the algae, the coral, and the fish. The corals lose their colorful food sources and become weak. This sad event is called coral bleaching, and it is happening on a grand scale in many places around the world. How does the ocean soak up carbon dioxide? Fish and other animals in the ocean breathe oxygen and give off carbon dioxide, just like land animals. Ocean plants take in the carbon dioxide and give off oxygen, just like land plants. The ocean is great at sucking up carbon dioxide from the air. It absorbs about one-quarter of the carbon dioxide that we humans create when we burn fossil fuels (oil, coal, and natural gas.) If not for the ocean, we'd be in even worse trouble with too much carbon dioxide. However, the ocean and everything in it are paying a price. The ocean is becoming more acidic. What does this mean? Liquids are either acid or alkaline. Each liquid falls somewhere along a scale with acid at one end and alkaline at the other. Normally, the ocean is slightly alkaline. However, when the ocean absorbs a lot of carbon dioxide, the water becomes more acidic. The alkalinity of the ocean is very important in maintaining a delicate balance needed for animals to make protective shells. If the water is too acidic, the animals may not be able to make strong shells. Corals could also be affected, since their skeletons are made of the same shell-like material. How does the ocean affect the climate? One way the ocean affects the climate in places like Europe is by carrying heat to the north in the Atlantic Ocean. Way up north, the water cools. That cold water in the North Atlantic Ocean sinks very deep and spreads out all around the world. The sinking water is replaced by warm water near the surface that moves to the north. Scientists call this the Great Ocean Conveyor Belt. The heat carried north helps keep the Atlantic Ocean warmer in the winter time, which warms the nearby countries as well. NASA missions that very accurately measure the hills and valleys in the ocean and changes in sea level help scientists understand what is happening with ocean currents. ReadWorks.org Page 5 of 12 What Is Happening in the Ocean? Does the salt in the ocean do anything? The amount of salt in the ocean water affects currents. Saltier water is heavier than less salty water. When salty ocean water freezes, the ice can no longer hold on to the salt. Instead, the salt mixes with the water below making it saltier and heavier. This affects the way currents move. The water in the North Atlantic sinks because it's cold, but also because it's salty -- there's lots of ice there. Being both cold AND salty makes the water really heavy, so it can sink very far. Glaciers, land ice and icebergs are made of fresh water, so what happens when this ice melts? Good question! If too much ice melts in the North Atlantic, the water could become less salty. If that happens, what would happen to the Ocean Conveyor Belt? Would it stop warming the North Atlantic? Could Europe get really cold? Scientists say it seems unlikely, but NASA satellites are keeping a close eye on the melting ice and the ocean currents to try to understand this complicated system better. ReadWorks.org Page 6 of 12 What Is Global Climate Change? What Is Global Climate Change? This text is from NASA's "Climate Kids." Is the climate of the whole Earth really changing? Yes! Earth has been getting warmer-and fast. Global climate is the average climate over the entire planet. And the reason scientists and folks like you are concerned is that Earth's global climate is changing. The planet is warming up fast-faster than at any time scientists know about from their studies of Earth's entire history. What is climate? "Climate" describes conditions over the long term and over an entire region. Climate is the big picture. It is the big picture of temperatures, rainfall, wind, and other conditions over a larger region and a longer time than weather. For example, the weather was rainy in Phoenix, Arizona, last week. But this city usually gets only about 7 inches of rain each year. So the climate for Arizona is dry. Much of Southern California also has a dry, desert climate. Brazil has a tropical climate, because it's warm and rains there a lot. [...] Do we care if Earth is getting warmer? Yes, we care! After all, Earth is our spaceship. It carries us on a 583-million-mile cruise around the Sun every year. It even has its own "force field." Earth has a magnetic field that protects us from killer radiation and brutal solar wind. For its life-support system, Earth has all the air, water, and food we need. Just like astronauts on a long space voyage, we need to monitor all our "ship's" vital functions and keep our Earth "ship shape." Does what we do matter? Yes--everything that happens here affects something over there. Earth has its own control system. The oceans, the land, the air, the plants and animals (including humans! ), and the energy from the Sun all affect each other to make everything work in harmony. Nothing changes in one place without changing something in another place. The overall effect gives us our global climate. ReadWorks.org Page 7 of 12 How Do We Know the Climate Is Changing? How Do We Know the Climate Is Changing? This text is from NASA's "Climate Kids." This text has been adapted for use by ReadWorks. The sky is still blue. Trees are still green. Wind still blows. Clouds are still white and fluffy. Rain still pours from the sky. Snow falls and it still gets really cold sometimes in some places. Earth is still beautiful. So what is the fuss about climate change and global warming? Well, after observing and making lots of measurements, using lots of NASA satellites and special instruments, scientists see some alarming changes. These changes are happening fast-much faster than these kinds of changes have happened in Earth's long past. Global air temperatures near Earth's surface rose almost one and one-half degrees Fahrenheit in the last century. Eleven of the last 12 years have been the warmest on record. Earth has warmed twice as fast in the last 50 years as in the 50 years before that. One and one-half degrees may not seem like much. But when we are talking about the average over the whole Earth, lots of things start to change. Why is Earth getting warmer? Why is Earth getting warmer? Here's one clue: As the temperature goes up, the amount of carbon dioxide in the air goes up. And as the carbon dioxide goes up, the temperature goes up even more. Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas. That means it traps heat from Earth's surface and holds the heat in the atmosphere. Scientists have learned that, throughout Earth's history, temperature and carbon dioxide levels in the air are closely tied. For the past 450,000 years on Earth, levels of carbon dioxide went up and down. But carbon dioxide levels never rose over 280 parts per million until 1950. But then something different happened and carbon dioxide levels increased very quickly. At the end of 2012, the level of carbon dioxide was at 394 parts per million. Why? Because of humans. When we burn fossil fuels, we release tons of carbon dioxide into the air. If you look at temperatures across the past 450,000 years on Earth, you can see that ReadWorks.org Page 8 of 12 How Do We Know the Climate Is Changing? temperature changes with carbon dioxide levels. Now that we have shot so far beyond past levels of carbon dioxide, temperatures have spiked as well. Yipes! How do we know what Earth was like long ago? A big part of the answer is ice cores. In Antarctica, scientists have drilled down two miles below the surface and brought up samples of the ice. These samples are called ice cores. It's like what you get if you plunge a drinking straw into a slushy drink and pull it out with your finger over the end of the straw. What you will have inside the straw is an ice core-although a very slushy one. The layers in an Antarctic ice core are frozen solid. They give clues about every year of Earth's history back to the time the deepest layer was formed. The ice contains bubbles of the air from each year. Scientists analyze the bubbles in each layer to see how much carbon dioxide they contain. Scientists can also learn about the temperatures for each year by measuring relative amounts of different types of oxygen atoms in the water. (Remember, water is H2O: two hydrogen atoms, and one oxygen. ) Other scientists study cores of sediment from the bottom of the ocean or lakes. Or they study tree rings and layers of rocks to give them clues about climate change throughout history. They compare all their findings to see if they agree. If they do, then their findings are accepted as most likely true. If they don't agree, they go back and figure out what is wrong with their methods. In the case of Earth's climate history, the facts agree from a lot of different kinds of studies. How can so little warming cause so much melting? Water can soak up a lot of heat. When the oceans get warmer, sea ice begins to melt in the Arctic and around Greenland. NASA's Earth satellites show us that every summer some Arctic ice melts and shrinks, getting smallest by September. Then, when winter comes, the ice grows again. But, since 1979, the September ice has been getting smaller and smaller and thinner and thinner. ReadWorks.org Page 9 of 12 How Do We Know the Climate Is Changing? Glaciers are another form of melting, shrinking ice. Glaciers are frozen rivers. They flow like rivers, only much slower. Lately, they have been speeding up. Many of them flow toward the ocean, then break off in chunks--sometimes huge chunks. In places such as Glacier National Park, the glaciers are melting and disappearing. The air is getting warmer, and less snow is falling during winter to renew the melted parts of the glaciers. Doesn't rising sea level just bring us closer to the beach? As more sea ice and glaciers melt, the global sea level rises. But melting ice is not the only cause of rising sea level. As the ocean gets warmer, the water actually expands! Sea level has risen 6.7 inches in the last 100 years. In the last 10 years, it has risen twice as fast as in the previous 90 years. If Greenland's ice sheet were to melt completely, sea level all over the world would rise by 16-23 feet (5 to 7 meters). Many coastal and island areas in the U.S. and across the world would be under water if sea level were to rise by 20 feet (6 meters). Double yipes! [...] ReadWorks.org Page 10 of 12 What Is the Big Deal with Carbon? What Is the Big Deal with Carbon? This text is from NASA's "Climate Kids." Why are they called fossil fuels? They're called fossil fuels because the fuel in your gas tank comes from the chemical remains of prehistoric plants and animals! All living things on Earth contain carbon. Even you contain carbon. Lots of it. If you weigh 100 pounds, 18 pounds of you is pure carbon! And plants are almost half carbon! With so much carbon, why isn't everything black and sooty? How can dogs be white and trees green? Because carbon, an element, combines easily with other elements to form new materials. The new stuff, called compounds, are quite different from pure carbon. An atom is the tiniest possible particle of any element, like carbon or oxygen. A carbon atom combines easily with two oxygen atoms to make the compound carbon dioxide. "C" stands for carbon, "O" stands for oxygen, so carbon dioxide is often called "C-O-2." Carbon dioxide is a gas. It is invisible. Carbon dioxide is really important. [...] How does carbon get into living things? Plants take in carbon dioxide. They keep the carbon and give away the oxygen. Animals breathe in the oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide. Plants and animals depend on each other. It works out well. For hundreds of millions of years, plants and animals have lived and died. Their remains have gotten buried deep beneath Earth's surface. So for hundreds of millions of years, this material has been getting squished and cooked by lots of pressure and heat. So what happens to all this dead plant and animal stuff? It turns into what we call fossil fuels: oil, coal, and natural gas. This is the stuff we now use to energize our world. We burn these carbon-rich materials in cars, trucks, planes, trains, power plants, heaters, speed boats, barbecues, and many other things that require energy. ReadWorks.org Page 11 of 12 What Is the Big Deal with Carbon? How does the carbon get out of living things? When fossil fuels burn, we mostly get three things: heat, water, and carbon dioxide. We also get some solid forms of carbon, like soot and grease. So that's where all the old carbon goes. All that carbon stored in all those plants and animals over hundreds of millions of years is getting pumped back into the atmosphere over just one or two hundred years. (Did you know that burning 6.3 pounds of gasoline produces 20 pounds of carbon dioxide? ) Is carbon in the air good, bad, or just ugly? Here's the big, important thing about carbon dioxide: It's a greenhouse gas. That means carbon dioxide in the atmosphere works to trap heat close to Earth. It helps Earth to hold on to some of the energy it gets from the Sun so the energy doesn't all leak back out into space. If it weren't for this greenhouse effect, Earth's oceans would be frozen solid. Earth would not be the beautiful blue and green planet of life that it is. So, carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are good-up to a point. But carbon dioxide is so good at holding in heat from the Sun, that even a small increase of it in the atmosphere can cause Earth to get even warmer. Throughout Earth's history, whenever the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has gone up, the temperature of Earth has also gone up. And when the temperature goes up, the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere goes up even more. ReadWorks.org Page 12 of 12