Conservation Groups Count on Outreach Specialists Conservation Groups Count on Outreach Specialists Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. Do you like to talk to people? Are you a good listener? Do you want to help make the world a better place? If so, consider a job as an outreach specialist with a conservation group. You will work with experts who understand nature and the environment to help them connect to the community. You'll also work with people in your community to help them understand the importance of nature. You'll make an important difference in the world. Stacy Lucas is an outreach specialist for the Anacostia Watershed Society (AWS). A watershed is all the land around a river or other large body of water. In a watershed, rain washes from land into small streams, and all the water flows to the bigger body of water. The Anacostia watershed area surrounds the Anacostia River and includes Washington, D.C. and parts of Maryland. More than one million people live in the Anacostia watershed area. The Anacostia River used to be one of the most polluted rivers in the United States. The AWS is working with people in the area to help clean up the river. Outreach is an important part of the AWS's work to clean up the Anacostia River. Lucas connects with people in the watershed by meeting with different groups of community members. She explains why caring for the water and the land are important. She also listens to community members to understand their needs. She says listening is one of the most important parts of her job. Lucas plans special events that help people learn ways to connect to the river and enjoy nature. Some events bring people together for cleanup projects all over the watershed. Every year on Earth Day, groups work to pick up trash on the riverbanks. Some people even use small boats to pick up trash from the bottom of the river. Other events include nature walks so people learn about the wildlife and plants that are native to the watershed. During some events, volunteers plant native plants along the riverbank. These native plants are important. They help clean water before it flows into the river. And the plants provide a home for wildlife and pollinators like birds, butterflies and other insects. Lucas also plans special events to help raise money for the AWS. People who care about the river area support some of the cleanup programs by donating money. The donations help pay for supplies. ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Conservation Groups Count on Outreach Specialists Lucas works together with many other departments at AWS to support the Society's goals. The marketing department helps tell the community about the important work the AWS is doing to clean up the river. The education department includes specialists who know about wildlife and nature. They help Lucas at events like nature walks. Outreach specialists like Lucas also listen to their co-workers. They all work together to make sure their events and projects reach lots of people and have the best possible effect. Lucas says she loves two things about her job. First, she likes the variety of the different people she meets and the events she plans. And second, she loves being creative. She enjoys thinking of new ways to help community members connect to nature. She has learned how to help people understand the importance of having a clean river in their community. Everyone needs nature. A cleaner environment helps make people healthier. The work outreach specialists do makes a difference in their communities now and in the future. If that work sounds interesting, maybe you would like to become an outreach specialist for a conservation group too. 