Article-A-Day Dinosaurs and Other Extinct Animals 6 Articles Check articles you have read: Mammoth Fossil Found 233 words The Pygmy Tyrant Mystery 362 words The Dino Express 841 words Monster Meals! 259 words Tiny Terror 721 words Small Wonder 363 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 11 Mammoth Fossil Found Mammoth Fossil Found Roger Castillo was walking along the banks of the Guadalupe River in California with his Labrador retriever when he noticed something unusual. He had stumbled on an awfully big bone. Castillo had watched many television shows about fossils. At first, he thought the bone was part of the rib cage of a large dinosaur. Then Castillo took a closer look. He noticed that the bones had an interesting shape. "That's when it hit me," Castillo told the San Jose Mercury News. "It's ivory! They're tusks!" A few days after the find, scientists confirmed that a cluster of fossils, including the tusks, belong to a mammoth that had roamed the area between 10,000 and 40,000 years ago. Scientists also found a massive pelvic bone and rib cage fragments. The fossils are remains of a Columbian mammoth, an elephant-like creature that grazed in the grasslands around San Francisco Bay. Columbian mammoths weighed up to 10 tons and stood about 13 feet tall. Mammoths first arrived in California from South America about 2 million years ago. Many lived in Northern California between ice ages. Columbian mammoths were cousins of the more familiar woolly mammoths. Both mysteriously disappeared. Tens of thousands of fossil fragments-of mammoths, camels, saber-toothed cats, and other animals-have been found in the area. Scientists hope to find even more bones. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 2 of 11 The Pygmy Tyrant Mystery The Pygmy Tyrant Mystery Scientists say Jane was a ferocious dinosaur. But they do not know what kind of dinosaur she actually was. Jane is the name that Mike Henderson and his team of scientists have given to the fossil of a dinosaur that they discovered. Henderson is a scientist at the Burpee Museum of Natural History in Rockford, Illinois. He is a paleontologist, a scientist who studies dinosaurs. Henderson told Weekly Reader that Jane is a Nanotyrannus, or "pygmy tyrant." What's a Pygmy Tyrant? Some scientists say the "pygmy tyrant" is a unique kind of dinosaur. Others say it is a juvenile, or young, T. rex. The disagreement about the "pygmy tyrant" can be traced back to the 1940s. That's when scientists discovered a puzzling dinosaur skull. In 1988, scientist Robert Bakker studied the skull. He determined that the skull was from a unique kind of dinosaur. He named the dinosaur Nanotyrannus, or "Nano." Until recently, the only examples of Nano were the ancient skull and lots of teeth. Scientists now hope that Jane will help them find out whether Nano was a juvenile T. rex or another kind of dinosaur. Searching for Clues Mike Henderson has already learned quite a bit about Jane. He says she lived about 67 million years ago. Jane's teeth were about 4 inches long. The teeth were serrated, or had jagged edges like a steak knife. She used her knifelike teeth to slice through prey. Jane stood about 7 or 8 feet high and weighed about 1 ton. T. rex towered over the puny Nano. The king of the dinosaurs stood from 15 to 20 feet high and weighed 7 to 8 tons. Its serrated teeth were 8 inches long. The proof as to what Nano was may lie at Jane's fingertips. T. rex had two fingers. If Jane has three fingers, she would not have been a young T. rex, she would have been a totally unique dinosaur. What does Henderson think? He told Weekly Reader, "Jane was probably a unique kind of dinosaur and not a young T. rex." But he has not found the dinosaur's fingers - yet. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 3 of 11 The Dino Express The Dino Express Experts discover dinosaur footprints along an ancient route. What do you get when you crowd dinosaurs, crocodiles, and flying reptiles onto the same route? A prehistoric traffic jam on a path known as the Dinosaur Freeway! Paleontologists in Colorado recently announced that they found about 350 additional footprints on the pathway. A paleontologist is a scientist who studies dinosaurs. The Dinosaur Freeway is a large area of rocky roadways in Colorado and some nearby states. The site is covered with thousands of tracks from ancient creatures, including dinosaurs. Paleontologist Martin Lockley and his team discovered the latest tracks. "When we first started looking at these tracks ... we had no idea there were so [many]," he told WR News. "It's very exciting when you find something new." Beasts of the Boulevard The Dinosaur Freeway extends for hundreds of miles through what is now Colorado, New Mexico, Kansas, and Oklahoma. The prints were made about 100 million years ago during the Cretaceous Period. Many animals used the path to migrate, researchers say. To migrate is to move from one area to another. Experts say many of the track marks were made by iguanodons (ih-GWAH-noh-dahnz). The plant-eating dinos are known for their thumb spikes, which they may have used to defend themselves. Other tracks are from plate-backed dinos called ankylosaurs (ANG-kih-loh-sorz). They most likely lumbered along the route in search of food, Lockley says. To lumber is to walk heavily. Scientists also noticed marks from pterosaurs' (TEHR-uh-sorz) claws. The flying reptiles may have left the marks in the earth as they swooped down to catch fish, scientists say. Rough Roadblocks Life on the freeway wasn't a walk in the park for dinosaurs, though. Lockley and his team also found footprints from giant crocodiles. They believe the killer crocodiles may have preyed on the plant-eating dinosaurs along the freeway. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2010 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 4 of 11 The Dino Express There is no evidence of meat-eating dinosaurs near the route. Until recently, experts were not sure what could have hunted the plant-eating dinosaurs. "Suddenly, we began to realize that the main predators were the crocodiles," Lockley explains. Many of the crocs were more than 13 feet long. That would have made the meat eaters big enough to take on iguanodons and other traveling dinosaurs. "The crocodiles would ambush [or attack] them when they were crossing streams," Lockley says. The Road Ahead Paleontologists are eager to study the footprints in greater detail. The markings can offer clues about the animals' sizes and diets. They can also reveal how fast the creatures were, says Spencer Lucas. He is a paleontologist who has searched for dino tracks along the Dinosaur Freeway in New Mexico. Lucas hopes that he and other scientists will continue to find tracks. That way, they can learn more about the dinosaurs. "Dinosaurs were around for 150 million years, and there were many kinds living all over the planet," Lucas told WR News. "That tells me there are many more dinosaur tracks out there waiting to be discovered." Dino Dates Dinosaurs lived during the Mesozoic (meh-zuh-ZOH-ik) Era. That was a period that lasted for about 183 million years. Read on to learn more about the days of dinos. Triassic Period Years: about 248 million to about 208 million years ago Fact: The first dinosaurs roamed Earth during this period. Jurassic Period Years: about 208 million to about 144 million years ago Fact: The biggest dinos lived during this time. Many new types of dinosaurs appeared. Cretaceous Period ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2010 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 5 of 11 The Dino Express Years: about 144 million to about 65 million years ago Fact: Dinosaurs became extinct at the end of this period, possibly because a meteorite struck Earth. The Dinosaur Tracker Martin Lockley was one of the first paleontologists to study dinosaurs' footprints. WR News recently tracked down the scientist to talk about his work. WR News: What was one memorable discovery you made on the Dinosaur Freeway? Martin Lockley: When we found the first pterosaur track ... it gave us a whole new branch of study. Since we found that track a few years ago, we've been finding a bunch more. Just when you think you're not going to find anything new ... you find something. WR News: What is a day searching for tracks like? ML: It can be very hot and hard work, and other times it can be very pleasant. There are some days when we don't collect anything. There was a day last year ... we collected 300 to 400 pounds of rock! WR News: Why did you decide to become a paleontologist? ML: I was brought up hanging around nature. I like the outdoor life. [Then] in college I had a really inspiring teacher who got me excited about paleontology. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2010 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 6 of 11 Monster Meals! Monster Meals! T. rex had strong jaws and bone-crushing teeth. But was the powerful dinosaur a hunter or a scavenger? A scavenger is an animal that feeds on dead animals. For years, scientists have been debating that question. Now an exhibit at the Natural History Museum in London, England gives evidence for both sides. "Everything says this dinosaur lived on dead meat," said American scientist Jack Horner. He helped the museum prepare for the exhibit. Scientists once believed that T. rex was a fast runner. But recent studies have shown that might not be true. Horner says that T. rex was not fast enough to catch other dinosaurs. He also says that its arms were too small to use for grabbing prey. Prey is an animal hunted by another animal for food. T. Rex Facts Name: Tyrannosaurus rex means "tyrant lizard king." Tyrant means "cruel ruler." Weight: 6 tons Length: 40 feet Height: 15 to 20 feet Other scientists don't agree with Horner. They argue that T. rex was a hunter. Even if T. rex wasn't fast, they say, it could have hunted slower dinosaurs. Scientists also say that T. rex did not need its arms to hunt. Animals without arms, such as sharks and snakes, hunt prey. Could T. rex have been both a hunter and a scavenger? One museum official thinks "the truth lies somewhere in the middle." It is up to visitors to think like scientists and decide for themselves. What do you think? ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 7 of 11 Tiny Terror Tiny Terror Scientists unearth one of the oldest known dinosaurs. Millions of years ago, a bloodthirsty dinosaur roamed Earth. The rough reptile terrorized its prey, viciously ripping apart animals with its sharp claws and knife-like teeth. Who was this fierce hunter? No, not Tyrannosaurus rex. It was Eodromaeus-a dinosaur the size of a dog! Scientists recently introduced the teeny meanie, which they discovered in Argentina. That is a country in South America. Experts say Eodromaeus (ee-oh-DROH-mee-uhss) is one of the oldest dinosaurs ever discovered. It lived during the Triassic Period about 230 million years ago. The dinosaur's name means "dawn runner." The pint-sized predator was four feet long from nose to tail and weighed less than fifteen pounds. Though Eodromaeus was small, it may hold big clues about the world's first dinosaurs. "We're looking at a snapshot of early dinosaur life," says Paul Sereno. He is a paleontologist who helped find the reptile. A Meaty History Eodromaeus has a history that scientists can really sink their teeth into. The dinosaur was one of the very first theropods. A theropod was a meat-eating dino that walked on two legs. The great-granddaddy of T. rex shared some key features with later carnivores, or meat eaters. The reptile had sharp, narrow teeth. "They have small, steak knife-like [edges] so that when they are jabbed into flesh, they open a wound," Sereno explained to WR News. Eodromaeus most likely chowed down on small dinosaurs and the young of other reptiles. Also like later meat eaters, the dinosaur had hands that were perfect for grabbing its dinner. "The bones behind the claws are very long, so it can get the claw around something," Sereno explains. In addition, the end of the dino's tail was stiff to let Eodromaeus keep its balance while running. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2010 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 8 of 11 Tiny Terror The Big Reveal Eodromaeus is helping scientists learn about other early dinosaurs. The reptile shared its turf with a similar-looking dinosaur called Eoraptor (ee-oh-RAP-tor). For years, experts suspected, or thought, that Eoraptor ate meat. But after comparing Eoraptor's and Eodromaeus's features, they determined that Eoraptor was an herbivore, or plant eater. Despite the dinos' different diets, they had a lot in common, including their size, experts say. "I think if they [ran] by, you might not even know the difference except that one might want to rip your arm off and the other one might ... hide in a bush," Sereno says. The fact that the dinosaurs shared so many features could mean that they are also very similar to the world's first dinosaur, Sereno says. Experts believe that dino roamed Earth ten million years earlier than Eoraptor and Eodromaeus did. That may seem like a long time, experts say, but it is relatively short compared with the 183 million years that dinosaurs existed. Digging Deeper Sereno and his team found both Eodromaeus and Eoraptor in northern Argentina. They believe the country may hold even more fossils-including the remains of the very first dinosaur. "We're going to go back," Sereno says. He's pretty sure some fossils will turn up. "They always come out to say hi when we come!" Profile of a Predator Small animals, beware! Eodromaeus's skeleton shows certain features that are common in all meat-eating dinosaurs, including T. rex. Dino Hunter ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2010 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 9 of 11 Tiny Terror Paleontologist Paul Sereno is dino-mite at discovering dinosaurs. He has found the ancient reptiles on five continents! WR News talked to Sereno about his work. WR News: How did it feel to find your first dinosaur, Herrerasaurus, in 1998? Paul Sereno: It was unbelievable. ... I was afraid it was going to disappear in front of my eyes. ... There we were, ... standing over something 230 million years old waiting for us to walk up and discover it. WR News: How do you name the dinosaurs you discover? PS: If there's nothing like a giant horn or something that's utterly peculiar [or unusual] on the animal you're describing, then you have to think harder about what is its way of life, what's special about it. WR News: Why is patience important for paleontologists? PS: It took years to find [Eodromaeus]. ... If we had cut corners anywhere, at any point along the way, we would know less than we know now. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2010 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 10 of 11 Small Wonder Small Wonder Scientists discover the remains of a mini flying animal in China. It's a bird, it's a plane, it's a ... tiny flying reptile? Scientists recently discovered the fossil of a sparrowsized creature in China. A reptile is an animal that crawls or slithers, has scales or bony plates, and lays eggs. The fossil is a pterosaur (TER-uh-sor). Pterosaurs were flying reptiles that had wings made of skin. It was also a pterodactyl (ter-uh-DAK-tuhl). A pterodactyl is an extinct type of pterosaur that lived millions of years ago. To be extinct means to have died out completely. The reptile is named Nemicolopterus crypticus (nem-i-coh-LOP-ter-uss CRIP-ti-cuss). It is little, but it may set a big record. Scientists say it is the smallest toothless pterosaur ever found! Nemicolopterus had a 9.8-inch wingspan. A wingspan is the distance from the tip of one wing to the tip of the other. The reptile also had a sharp, pointy beak and curved, birdlike claws. The reptile's small size may have had advantages. Scientists say being small may have allowed Nemicolopterus to hide from animals that eat other animals. Its size may have also helped it find food. Because it was small, the reptile could "be [quicker] to catch insects," scientist Xiaolin Wang told WR News. Wang was on the team that discovered the pterosaur. Scientists plan to study the reptile's fossil in more detail. They hope it will offer clues about how pterosaurs changed over time. "They are ancestors of the large pterosaurs," Wang says. Pterosaur Types Pterosaurs ranged in size from as small as a bird to as big as an airplane. Here are three different kinds of pterosaurs. Dimorphodon: This pterosaur's wingspan was about 4 feet. It also had a huge head, and its legs could stretch out. Pteranodon: This pterosaur was about 6 feet long with a wingspan of 20 to 25 feet. Pteranodon weighed about 25 pounds. Quetzalcoatlus: This is the largest pterosaur ever found. Its wingspan was about 40 feet. It also had a long, thin beak. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 11 of 11