Studying Soil: Why is Dirt Important? Studying Soil: Why is Dirt Important? Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. The next time you're outside in nature, look down. You might not think about the dirt under your feet very often, but soil is important! Life on land depends on the top layer of soil that is only about one to two feet thick. This small layer of soil contains the nutrients that keep Earth's plants alive. And most of the animals-including people-depend on plants to live. How does this topsoil form? Over time, rocks break down into smaller particles and mix with dead plants. The plants are broken down by insects, bacteria, water, sunshine, and time. The nutrients that were once in the plants end up in the soil. This whole process takes up to 15,000 years! Different types of soil can be found in different places. Many things can affect what is in soil, including the kinds of rocks and plants that the soil came from. Because soil is so important to living things, knowing what's in soil is important. In fact, soil science is a whole area of study, with people who do it as a career! One part of the job of a soil scientist is to analyze samples of dirt in a lab. They can study the nutrients and other compounds that are in the soil. They can also tell if the soil is polluted. The work of soil scientists affects a lot of people. Soil scientists can help farmers choose which crops to grow in a certain area, or whether to raise animals. They can help farmers get rid of manure from livestock. Engineers and architects also depend on soil scientists. They all work together to decide where buildings can be built. People who want to build a house need soil experts to help them find the best location. Soil experts also manage the special landscapes of golf courses. They even help the government create new laws for people to take better care of soil in cities and towns. In some areas of the world, the soil is in trouble. Earth's changing climate is causing changes in local weather. Some areas have more big storms and floods. Soil experts are needed to help manage water problems like these. That's because the right soil and the plants growing in it can play an important role in preventing floods. The plants soak up extra water, and help it travel more slowly through the ground. So making sure soil stays where it belongs is important. If soil washes away during a flood, it can cause many other problems. Streams or rivers can get clogged with dirt, which can kill fish and other animals. And once the dirt has washed into the water, it won't come back. Replacing soil once it's gone is almost impossible. Soil scientists play an important part in helping figure out how to keep soil in place. ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Studying Soil: Why is Dirt Important? Soil scientists do important work that affects us all. In fact, there is a head soil scientist in every state in the United States! Steve Baker is the state soil scientist for Ohio. When he went to college, he had a different career in mind. Then, he decided to try something new. He thought about what he enjoyed doing. He liked to spend time outside. He liked learning new things. He liked science and technology. And he liked talking to other people. He visited with many professors at his college. They told him about soil science, and he decided it was the perfect profession for him. If helping nature and supporting other people's work sounds interesting to you, soil science may be a great career for you too! ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 