Scat-sniffing Dogs are Helping to Save Orcas Scat-sniffing Dogs are Helping to Save Orcas Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. Dogs love sniffing. The part of their brain that controls their sense of smell is 40 times bigger than the same part in a human brain! People have learned how to train dogs to sniff out all sorts of things. Dogs can find rare mushrooms, bedbugs, and even people with certain types of cancer all by sniffing. Trainers work closely with a dog to teach it to find a certain scent. The trainer finds a toy or activity the dog really likes and uses that as a reward. Then, the trainer shows the dog a sample of an item to find. The dog smells the item. Then, the trainer hides the item for the dog to find. After the dog finds the item, they get the reward. Dogs can even be taught to bark or wag their tail when they find their target item. Now, people are using dogs' sniffing skills to help save orcas. Orcas are black and white mammals also known as killer whales. They are actually the largest type of dolphin. Dog trainers at the University of Washington are working with orca scientists. They are training dogs to ride in boats and sniff for orca scat. What is scat? It's another word for poop. Scientists can analyze the scat collected from the water and learn about the orca. Learning about the orcas in Washington is an important goal. Only about 80 orcas live in the Puget Sound in Washington. While orcas live in oceans all over the world, this particular group is called Southern Resident orcas. And they are at risk of dying out. Many scientists and researchers are trying to help them survive. But the first step is to understand why there are so few of them. The Southern Resident orcas are not having many babies. This is one reason they are at risk of dying out. Scientists are trying to figure out why the female orcas aren't having babies. They think part of the problem may be the food the orcas eat. The orcas eat mostly fish, and they prefer Chinook salmon. Unfortunately, some of the water the fish live in is polluted. The fish absorb some of the pollutants, or chemicals. Then, when the orcas eat fish that contain chemicals, the orcas absorb the pollutants. The scientists suspect the female orcas pass the pollutants on to their babies during pregnancy or when nursing. This may be one of the reasons orca babies have died. But the researchers need to know more to help the orcas. One way to study orcas without having to capture one is to study their scat. Scientists can analyze the scat and learn a lot. They can learn the orca's gender, tell if it's pregnant, see ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Scat-sniffing Dogs are Helping to Save Orcas what the orca has been eating, and check if it's been eating any dangerous chemicals. But finding the scat can be a challenge. That's why the scientists have hired helpers: the scatsniffing dogs! Scientists hope that analyzing the scat and doing other research will help them find ways to save the Southern Resident orcas. ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 