Article-A-Day Endangered Animals 6 Articles Check articles you have read: Leaping Lemurs! 233 words Panda Power! 292 words Elephant Tales 466 words Reefs at Risk 237 words Reef Rescue 466 words America's Bird Soars 335 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 10 Leaping Lemurs! Leaping Lemurs! Scientists are thrilled about some tiny, furry finds. They have discovered two new species of lemurs on Madagascar, an island located off the southeast coast of Africa. The endangered animals are found only in Madagascar and a few of the country's nearby islands. Madagascar is home to some of the world's most exotic, or unusual, plants and animals. Lemurs live mainly in forest trees and are nocturnal, or active at night. One of the newly discovered creatures has wide eyes, is small enough to fit in a hand, and bounces from tree branch to tree branch in the dark. Its name in Malagasy means "good man." Malagasy is the official language of Madagascar. The animal was named after scientist Steve Goodman. He has been studying the tiny creatures in Madagascar for 20 years. It is truly an honor to have an animal named after me," says Goodman. The other species is a giant mouse lemur with a bushy tail. It was named in honor of Madagascar's children. Its name in Malagasy means "child." The scientists chose that name to remind Madagascar's children to care for the many plants and animals in their country. Finding a new lemur species is rare because many of the tiny creatures have become extinct. The recent find means that there are now 49 known species of lemurs in the wild. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 2 of 10 Panda Power! Panda Power! Note: This article was first published in 2009. Scientists put on their detective hats in search of giant pandas. Scientists were on the case! They collected clues. The scientists saw paw prints in the mud and fur on the bark of trees. What were they doing? Counting giant pandas! After four years, the detective work is done. During that time, scientists figured out how many pandas live in China. All wild giant pandas live in that country. "Pandas are very hard to see in the wild," scientist Colby Loucks told Weekly Reader. "They hide in the thick bamboo forests." That is why scientists used clues to do the count. The result of the panda count was a surprise to scientists. They learned that hundreds more pandas exist than experts once thought! "We found pandas living in areas we didn't know had any," said Loucks. Protecting Pandas Although the news is good, pandas remain endangered. That means they are in danger of dying out. Panda Fun Facts á A panda spends 14 hours a day eating up to 83 pounds of bamboo. á A newborn panda weighs 3 to 4 ounces. That is about the weight of a hamster. á A panda's front paws have a wrist bone. The bone works like a thumb. The panda uses it to grasp bamboo. The main threat to pandas is habitat loss. A habitat is a place in nature where an animal lives. Panda habitat is lost when people cut down parts of the forest for wood and farming. Currently, China has more than 40 giant panda nature centers. People are not allowed to cut down trees there. Scientists want to create more nature centers to give pandas a better chance for survival. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 3 of 10 Elephant Tales Elephant Tales Note: This article was first published in 2009. Shirley, a 4-ton elephant, has something to say. She opens her mouth and gurgles. The nearby elephants understand the sound, but it's just noise to me. What exactly is Shirley saying? Scientists are not sure, but they are trying to find out how elephants like Shirley communicate. I visited Shirley at the Elephant Sanctuary in Hohenwald, Tennessee. A sanctuary is an area in nature where wildlife is protected. The sanctuary is home to Shirley and five other elephants-Bunny, Jenny, Sissy, Tarra, and Winkie. All six animals were once in zoos or circuses. Now they roam freely on 2,700 acres of grassland and woods. A Noisy Group Not all the elephants at the sanctuary gurgle like Shirley. Tarra barks like a sea lion when she is happy. Bunny speaks in squeaks. I soon got used to hearing the different "voices" of the elephants. When one gray giant came close to me, I wondered which elephant it was. Then I heard the thwap sound of her trunk slapping the floor. "Aha!" I said to myself. "That's Sissy clapping." I also learned that the elephants share a special language of screeches, rumbles, and trumpet-like sounds. Elephants also communicate in a way that people cannot hear. Infrasound is a sound that is too low in pitch for the human ear to pick up. Scientists believe that elephant infrasound can travel for miles. Elephants in a herd use it to keep in touch when they become separated. Old Friends The elephants speak to one another for the same reasons people talk. Sometimes they even shout with excitement. When Shirley first came to the sanctuary, Jenny looked at her and began to roar. Shirley roared back. At first, the animal keepers had no idea what the fuss was about. Later, they discovered that Shirley and Jenny had crossed paths 20 years earlier in a circus. The elephants' roars meant they still recognized each other. They had a lot of catching ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2003 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 4 of 10 Elephant Tales up to do! Elephants at Risk There are two species, or kinds, of elephants-Asian and African. In the wild, both species are endangered. Animals are endangered when so few exist that the species may die out. In 1970, almost 2 million Asian elephants lived in the wild in Southeast Asia. Now only 25,600 to 32,750 live there. Their habitat, or home, is being gradually destroyed. As the population grows, humans are building on more of the land. In Africa, only half as many wild elephants exist today as lived there 20 years ago. Humans have illegally killed the animals for their tusks. Tusks are the long, curved front teeth of elephants. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2003 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 5 of 10 Reefs at Risk Reefs at Risk Hundreds of clownfish dart in and out of the gaps in coral reefs. The reefs are home to thousands of ocean plants and animals. Along with fish, those animals include crabs, turtles, and sea horses. Those ocean creatures may have no place to live in the future. Many coral reefs around the world have been destroyed, and many more are being destroyed. Some scientists say more than half of the world's reefs may be gone by the year 2030. What is causing coral reefs to disappear? Scientists say people are largely to blame. Ships and fishing nets often damage the reefs. Other threats include pollution, storms, and disease. It's Alive! Coral reefs may look like rocks, but they are actually living structures. They are made up of tiny sea animals. Those tiny creatures are called coral polyps. The polyps build hard shells around themselves. When a polyp dies, it leaves behind its shell. Young polyps attach themselves to the old shells. Over many years, the polyps form a coral reef. Saving the Reefs Scientists are working hard to protect coral reefs. They are mapping and studying the reefs. Many protected areas are being widened. Fishing is not allowed in those areas. Solving the coral reef problem is a challenge, said one scientist. "It requires us to understand what's going on much better than we do." ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 6 of 10 Reef Rescue Reef Rescue The hit movie Finding Nemo follows a clownfish that is scooped up from the Great Barrier Reef. In real life, clownfish are among the thousands of colorful sea creatures that call the Great Barrier Reef home. Stretching 1,250 miles along Australia's northeastern coast, the Great Barrier Reef is the longest coral reef in the world. A coral reef is a living underwater structure. But these days, the Great Barrier Reef has found itself in trouble. Overfishing, pollution, and high temperatures are harming its health. That's why the government in Australia is trying to help rescue the reef. Underwater Garden While coral may look like a plant, it is actually made up of tiny sea animals. Those sea animals are called coral polyps. As polyps die, they leave hard shells behind. Other polyps grow on top of the shells. Over thousands of years, they form a coral reef in warm water that is not very deep. In many ways, the Great Barrier Reef resembles an underwater garden. Coral can be hard or soft. It forms in different colors and in strange shapes. Some coral looks like hardened brains. Other coral looks like fans and lettuces. The reef bursts with schools of tropical fish, darting among gaps in the coral. The reef supplies food and shelter to creatures living in and around the coral. Turtles, sharks, sea horses, and crabs are among its many inhabitants. Helping Humans While the reef is important to ocean life, it helps humans, too. People rely on the reef for both food and jobs. It also provides medicine used to treat disease. Each year, the Great Barrier ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 7 of 10 Reef Rescue Reef contributes about $975 million to the economy through tourism and fishing. Stressed Out Is it surprising, then, that the Great Barrier Reef is under too much stress? Fishing nets and ships break off sections and damage the reef. Air and water pollution are also doing harm. At the same time, warmer sea temperatures have caused coral bleaching on half of the reef. The high temperatures cause the coral to turn white, often killing it. Reef Rescue In an effort to help save the reef, the government has limited fishing to two-thirds of it. That plan increases the number of "green zones." Those are areas that are off-limits to fishermen and boats. However, tourists and researchers can still visit them. Many fishermen are upset about the plan because they rely on the reef for jobs. The Australian government says that its plan will help keep the reef safe from some threats. "It is very important that we give the reef proper protection for the future," said one government official. "The reef is Australia's greatest natural [treasure]." ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 8 of 10 America's Bird Soars America's Bird Soars The bald eagle is flying high! This majestic bird clawed its way back from the edge of extinction, or dying out. In the middle of the 20th century, the number of bald eagles in the United States was declining rapidly. Thus, the species was put on the nation's list of endangered species. In 2007, however, the bald eagle was taken off the endangered species list. Trouble Ahead In the early 1700s, bald eagles were a common sight. There were about half a million of those birds living in what is now the United States. Over time, their population fell dramatically. In the early 1960s, a very low amount of bald eagles remained. What caused the number to drop? Hunting and the use of harmful chemicals sprayed on crops were largely to blame. Those chemicals poisoned the birds and their eggs. Pollution also contributed to the problem. Bald eagles often became sick after eating fish from polluted waters. In addition, the bald eagles' habitat was being destroyed as people cut down trees to build roads and homes. A habitat is a place in nature where an animal makes its home. Population Boom Thanks to laws that helped protect bald eagles and banned harmful chemicals, the birds made a comeback. In 2007, the population of bald eagles living in the United States reached about 20,000, and they were taken off the endangered species list. Conservation, or protection, efforts have helped their survival. "There is no doubt that it is the single best conservation story the United States has had," bald eagle expert Bryan Watts told Weekly Reader. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 9 of 10 America's Bird Soars A National Symbol In 1782, the bald eagle was made the national bird of the United States. The nation's founders chose the bird because it symbolized freedom, strength, and courage. At the time, some people disagreed about the choice for the national bird. Benjamin Franklin, for example, thought the turkey would make a better choice because it was "a much more respectable bird." ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 10 of 10