Article-A-Day Energy 6 Articles Check articles you have read: Electricity & Energy: Circuits 293 words Engineering and Natural Gas 645 words Solar Absorbers and the Future of Electricity 995 words Free Transfer 394 words Houston Affects the Earth 791 words Energy for Life 705 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 11 Electricity & Energy: Circuits Electricity & Energy: Circuits by ReadWorks An electric circuit is the complete path of an electric current. The simplest electric circuit is made up of two components, or parts. The first component is an energy source, such as a battery or generator. The second component is a wire or cable that carries energy from one end of the source. Then it connects back to the source at the other end. Usually a simple circuit has an energy recipient, such as a motor or lamp. An energy recipient is connected to the electric circuit by the wire or cable. There are two basic types of electric circuits: series circuits and parallel circuits. Series Circuit Series circuits are easy to understand if you think about certain strands of light bulbs linked to each other. One example is Christmas lights. With some Christmas lights, all of the lights don't work when one bulb goes out. Why does this happen? This is because in a series circuit the energy has to go through one energy recipient to get to the next. If a bulb blows out, the energy stops at that bulb. It never makes it to the next bulb. Parallel Circuit In a parallel circuit, energy is passed through the energy recipients and through a second connection. As long as there's an energy source, electricity will always be able to reach each recipient. If there is a problem with one recipient, the other recipients are not affected. In practice, most electrical devices have combination circuits. Combination circuits do not use just one type of circuit. Instead, combination circuits utilize both series and parallel types. Devices that use combination circuits include computers and television sets. More complex circuits often have more electric components like switches and resistors, which limit the electric current flow. ReadWorks.org á © 2012 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 2 of 11 Engineering and Natural Gas Engineering and Natural Gas by James Folta Matt Nelsen is a Mechanical Engineer for PG&E, which stands for Pacific Gas & Electric. PG&E is a company in Northern California that provides electricity and natural gas. Matt, as an engineer, designs the pipes that carry natural gas. Natural gas is found underground, trapped in rocks. It can be captured by drilling and pulling it out of the rocks. Once it is captured, it is refined so that people can use it. This gas can then be burned to do lots of different things. This natural gas is provided by PG&E to people in Northern California. It is used in houses and individual buildings like schools. This gas is used for heating, water heating, and cooking. Also, PG&E provides gas to factories and other big companies. This gas is used for power generation, equipment sanitation, and product development. Everything from making electricity to recycling to making all the things in stores can use natural gas. This gas is moved in pipes. Underground there are a lot of pipes that carry many different things in and out of buildings. There are pipes that carry water into a house and then there are pipes that carry the dirty water out. There are also pipes that move natural gas. Matt designs these pipes for PG&E, figuring out where the pipes need to be so that the gas gets where it needs to go. This is called designing "high-pressure transmission pipeline systems." This means that Matt figures out how many gas pipes are needed, how big they need to be, and how much gas needs to go through them. Matt needs to make sure that on any day, everyone who needs gas has it. To do so, Matt first figures out how much gas is used throughout the year. In Northern California, gas usage peaks in the winter, "as customers use more gas when it's cold out," says Matt. People need more gas in the winter to keep their houses warm and to heat their water for showers and baths. He designs pipes to be able to provide the necessary amount of gas. Matt likes being an engineer because of the problem solving he gets to do. He likes thinking about "how to approach complex issues and develop intelligent...solutions." Matt has to be able to be flexible and solve problems. If something goes wrong, he is one of the people whom PG&E asks to fix the issue. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 3 of 11 Engineering and Natural Gas Matt also likes getting to see the pipe systems that he designs built in the real world. He says it is a little scary because his pipe designs affect "so many people: construction workers, maintenance crews, customers." There are a lot of people depending on Matt getting the pipes right! But Matt says it's worth it when his pipe systems are built. When Matt's designs are built and work like he expects them to, he says he feels like he's "really adding something to help people. It's a good feeling." Matt says the hardest thing is being worried that his solutions won't work. It's hard to know what will actually happen. Will there be enough gas? Will the pipes work correctly? Matt says that he can't "have every piece of information [he] need[s] to solve a problem." This means that Matt and other engineers have to assume some things. Matt can guess how the pipes will work and how many people will need gas, but he can't know for sure. Not knowing for sure is the hard part of being an engineer. There is a lot of work that goes into making gas pipes work. Matt works very hard to make sure that they work properly. So next time you wash your hands with warm water or you use a gas stove, think of Matt and all the engineers who made sure your home is getting the gas it needs! ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 4 of 11 Solar Absorbers and the Future of Electricity Solar Absorbers and the Future of Electricity by James Folta Electricity is what we use to power things at home or at school. You can probably look around right now and see an electrical outlet or two. Everything that we plug into one of these outlets uses electricity. But where does this electricity come from? Right now we have a few ways to make electricity. Some are better than others. There are some scientists who are trying to find new ways to get electricity that are better for the planet Earth. Most electricity is generated by machines that are run by steam. Making a lot of steam is the hard part. Water has to be heated up so that it boils and becomes steam. In the United States, a lot of different things are burned to create this steam. The most common things that are burned are oil, gas, and coal. The United States uses a lot of electricity, and so we burn a lot of oil, gas, and coal. In 2012, the United States of America used more oil and gas than any other country in the world and was number two in the world for using coal. The problem with using these things is that burning them can be harmful and damaging to the earth. Also, there is only a certain amount of coal, gas, and oil in the world, and they are running out very quickly. We can't make more of them. What happens when they run out? How else can we get electricity? There are some people who are trying to answer this question. There are many scientists who are developing different methods of getting electricity. One of these people is Jeff Chou, who is a scientist and researcher working on new ways of getting electricity. Jeff works at MIT, which stands for Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It is a university in Cambridge, Massachusetts. MIT is very well known, and people from all over the world go to study there. It is one of the best colleges to learn and practice science. Jeff is at MIT working as a researcher on electricity. He decided he wanted to be a scientist in high school: "I happened to like the math and physics classes, so in college I chose to focus on electrical engineering." Electrical engineering is studying how electricity works. This is helpful for knowing how things like computers work. In fact, Jeff can build the computer chips that make computers run! Jeff likes being a scientist because he can change the world. "I get to work on tough problems that could help out everyone on Earth," Jeff says. Jeff likes that he gets to try to "come up with new solutions by thinking creatively. In fact, in science, wild and crazy ideas are encouraged!" Jeff has been working on how to get better solar power. Solar power, Jeff says, is "converting the light we get from the sun into usable electrical energy." You can feel this energy yourself: the sun feels hot on your skin because it is sending out energy. Solar power is different from oil, gas, or coal because it is what is called renewable energy. This means that its source is not consumed when we use the energy, as happens with gas, for instance, which burns away. Things like the wind, the sun, and ocean currents are called renewable because they won't go away anytime soon. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 5 of 11 Solar Absorbers and the Future of Electricity At MIT, Jeff has been "working on new ways to convert solar energy into electricity." He made something called an absorber. It takes the heat from something hot, like the sun, and turns it into electricity. Absorbers are very small. They are special panels made out of silicon and other materials. These panels can "absorb and convert each photon [from the sun] that comes in, into an electron." These electrons can be used to make electricity. This can power anything, like a toaster, or a TV, or even some cars. Jeff's job as a researcher involves doing lots of experiments. Jeff says that experiments are the heart of science. You have to take your ideas and test them to see if they work or not. "Sometimes the ideas work and sometimes they don't, and that's science in a nutshell," Jeff says. These experiments involve lots of special equipment and laboratories. Jeff does most experiments in a clean room, which is a room that has no germs or dirt or anything that might damage his experiments. In the clean room, Jeff made the tiny solar absorbers. Then he shined light on them to see how much energy they could make. He took careful notes and measurements so that he could tell everyone how good or bad the device was. Jeff likes working with solar energy because it is better for the earth. "Solar energy is very important because we can create electrical energy without polluting the earth," Jeff says. Older ways of getting electricity that use oil, gas, or coal are more harmful. They "burn toxic chemicals and release them into the sky and Earth, which are harmful to you and me," Jeff says. But the absorbers that Jeff built are cleaner. "All we have to do is point our solar silicon panels towards the sun, and we get clean energy," Jeff says. For Jeff, his solar absorbers are very exciting because they can help us turn anything hot into electricity. Jeff is hoping that if his panels are sensitive enough, anything hot could generate electricity, not just the sun. He says, "There are a lot of hot things we encounter every day; imagine if we can now use those to help power an entire city!" This is the exciting part of science for Jeff. He is helping to make the world a cleaner and better place through his solar panels. If scientists like Jeff are successful, the world would be able to get all its electricity from clean, renewable sources. This would make our world a cleaner and safer place to live. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 6 of 11 Free Transfer Free Transfer by ReadWorks The faster a given object is moving, the more energy it possesses. This kind of energy is called "kinetic energy," from the Greek word kinesis, meaning motion. The faster a given object is moving, the greater its kinetic energy. Imagine you're trying to hit a target with a bow and arrow. If you just throw the arrow with your hand, it won't go very fast, and even if your aim is good, the arrow won't penetrate the target -it'll just bounce off! But if you use the bow, you can shoot the arrow much faster. The faster the arrow is going, the more kinetic energy it has. Kinetic energy is what allows the arrow to puncture the target. Energy can never be created or destroyed, only transferred-moved from place to place. One way energy is moved from place to place is by moving objects. Imagine hitting a tee ball with a bat. When you hit the ball with the bat, energy is transferred from the bat to the ball. If you swing the bat slowly, the ball won't go very far when you hit it. But if you swing the bat faster, it will have more kinetic energy. That energy will be transferred to the ball, and the ball will go much farther. Energy can also be transferred through sound. Try high-fiving your friend very slowly. You probably won't make very much sound. If you high-five at the normal speed, your hands each have more kinetic energy, and you'll make a nice smack. What you're hearing is energy turned into sound. The same thing happens when you hit a drum, or pluck the strings of a guitar. Energy can also be transferred through light. Light from the sun makes your body feel warmer. Plants use energy from light and grow bigger and make oxygen. Energy can also be transferred through electricity. This kind of energy can be used for almost anything. But remember: Energy cannot be created. Energy in the form of electricity has to be transferred from another kind of energy. Wind power uses a machine called a turbine that turns the energy of the wind into electricity. Coal, oil, and gas power burn different kinds of material, creating heat that gets turned into electricity. Solar power generates electricity from the sun's light-although not as easily as a plant. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 7 of 11 Houston Affects the Earth Houston Affects the Earth by ReadWorks When Houston's mayor Bill White went to work in 2008, he knew the city needed to make some changes. The city of Houston, Texas, is home to over two million people. It is the fourth most populous city in the United States and it takes up about six hundred square miles of land. The city is located in the southeastern part of Texas. It sits on the Gulf of Mexico. Houston is sometimes called the "Energy Capital of the World." This is because a lot of oil refineries, natural gas production, and other energy companies are in Houston. Energy runs Houston. It creates jobs and powers local businesses and homes. But energy also makes an impact on the local environment. The ships that come to Houston to deliver petroleum disrupt local marine environments by producing waste emissions, noise and pollution. The processes that turn crude oil into gasoline and other petrochemicals release chemicals into the air. Too many chemicals in the air lead to air pollution. This affects people in Houston as well as the animals that live in or fly through the area. In 2008 Mayor White started a campaign to reduce pollution in Houston. He made local factories and oil refineries reduce pollution. Mayor White worked to reduce the impact of energy consumption in Houston. In 2008, he increased the use of solar energy in the city. He put solar panels on several city buildings. The sun shines a lot in Houston, so capturing energy from the sun is easy. The energy it produces does not create the kind of pollution created by coal, gas and oil. It can be stored in batteries for use at night. People in Houston were coming to understand their impact on the Earth's environment. People in Houston, like people all over the United States, need gasoline in order to drive their cars. They also need natural gas and electricity to run their homes and businesses. This energy consumption increases the amount of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere and changes the air quality. People also need water to drink, bathe, wash their clothes, and prepare their food. People in Houston were starting to see that the water and food they used were taken out of the Houston-area environment. It was therefore not available for non-human use. These people started to ask themselves if they could use less. Could Houston have less impact on the environment? In 2010 the people of Houston elected Annise Parker to be mayor. Mayor Parker wanted to ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 8 of 11 Houston Affects the Earth build on the work Mayor White had done. She wanted Houston to be called the "Energy Conservation Capital of the World." She started a "Bike to Work Day" to encourage people to drive less. Driving less means people use less gasoline. That means less carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere. Businesses worked with Mayor Parker to start "Lights Out Houston," a program that gets office buildings downtown to turn off their lights at night. Turning off the lights helps conserve electricity. Turning off the lights is also good for wildlife. A city that is bright at night can affect the way birds migrate. At night a large, bright city like Houston is even visible from outer space! The people of Houston have applied the ideas of energy conservation to other areas, including water use and farming. The water in Houston comes from Lake Houston. Lake Houston is a reservoir, a holding facility for water that was created by building a dam on the San Jacinto River. The reservoir was completed in 1953 when the city needed to guarantee more water for its growing population. (A dam stops the flow of water in a river and creates a lake or reservoir. The lake or reservoir must be managed to make sure it does not overflow, and to protect the wildlife that live in the river. ) As Houston grows in terms of population, so will its need for water. The city of Houston now sells rain barrels for rainwater collection. Rain barrels can be used to collect rainwater. This water can be used for watering gardens and lawns. Doing so will reduce the amount of water the city takes from Lake Houston. The city has started community gardens. These gardens allow Houston residents to grow their vegetables in containers in the city. This way they do not have to rely as much on farms. Land that was used for farms might someday be allowed to rest. The animals that lived on the land before it was a farm could return. The water that was used to grow the plants on the farm would not be used. Life in Houston has changed since 2008. The changes have been good for the environment. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 9 of 11 Energy for Life Energy for Life by ReadWorks ENERGY IS THE KEY We use a lot of energy to live. Whether we're playing, studying or eating, energy makes these activities possible. We also use energy for production-to run machines, for instance. Much of this energy comes from fuels like oil, coal or natural gas. These fuels are used to make the blacktop and basketballs at recess, as well as generate the electricity for the lights all around you. Think of all the energy required to plant, grow, harvest, transport and cook your lunch, and you can start to understand that energy is a key to life! NATURAL, BUT NOT FOREVER Fuels like natural gas, oil and coal are important natural resources. They are known as fossil fuels and take millions of years to form. We've used them for hundreds of years, and they've powered everything from planes and trains to cars and computers. Unfortunately, fossil fuels are non-renewable forms of energy. Our power plants burn them faster than nature makes them, and when they are burned, power plants create emissions harmful to the environment. To use fossil fuels, we first need to get them out of the earth with technologies like oil rigs, coal mines and natural gas wells. The drilling, mining and pumping of these natural resources often requires very large operations. These procedures result in producing the important energy we need, but they need fossil fuels themselves to operate and can often negatively impact the land where these fuels are found. POWERING THE FUTURE Fortunately, there are forms of renewable energy out there. They also come from nature and don't harm the environment as much as fossil fuels. Furthermore, they aren't consumed to produce energy, so we can use them again and again. One form of renewable energy is solar energy. Solar energy uses solar panels, which collect sunlight and convert it directly into electricity. Another form of renewable energy is wind energy. Like an extremely large pinwheel, wind turbines have blades that rotate when the wind blows, and this movement generates electricity. Some solar and wind energy power plants are connected to batteries so they can supply electricity even when the sun isn't shining or the wind isn't blowing. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 10 of 11 Energy for Life One form of renewable energy that has been around for a very long time is hydropower. Hydropower is energy produced by falling and running water. Hydropower technologies can be as simple as a watermill on a stream or as complex as a hydroelectricity dam. Hydropower is a great source of renewable energy: in Washington state (in the USA), for instance, it produces approximately 75% of the entire state's energy! THE RIGHT PLAN Using renewable energy is a good way to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels, though renewable energies have some negative impacts on the earth as well. Solar power plants are usually built in deserts where sunshine is reliable and strong, but the desert land that is disrupted for the construction and operation of these power plants is actually rich with plant and animal life. Wind energy power plants are called wind farms and require a lot of land. Though each turbine only takes up a small area of land, wind farms can easily have hundreds or thousands of turbines. With that many turbines together, their presence can easily affect birds, bats and other wildlife in the area. Hydropower plants can generate a lot of energy and electricity, but their existence can dramatically alter the environment around them. Many hydropower plants use dams to create the electricity. Fish can be easily blocked by a dam and prevented from swimming to important spawning grounds. Dams can also fail and cause massive flooding. Also, in the event of a drought, the electricity produced could truly be limited to a trickle! However, by carefully planning the locations of renewable energy power plants, their harmful impact to the planet can be minimized and their renewable and sustainable benefits maximized. LOOKING FORWARD Almost everything we do requires some sort of energy. It's important to understand where our energy comes from, how it is produced and what effect each type has on our environment. As technology improves, we can balance the use of non-renewable fossil fuels with renewable energy for a healthier planet. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 11 of 11