Article-A-Day Helping the Environment 6 Articles Check articles you have read: Compact Fluorescent Lights 236 words Vermicomposting 281 words Reduce Waste 850 words Recycle 254 words Reuse 455 words Help Eliminate Waste 323 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 11 Compact Fluorescent Lights Compact Fluorescent Lights This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. What are CFLs? CFLs have a coiled tube instead of the round bulb you see in old-style light bulbs (incandescent bulbs). They are like the long fluorescent light tubes you see in ceiling lights, but shrunk down and coiled up so they can replace incandescent bulbs. In a CFL, an electric current is driven through a tube containing argon gas and a small amount of mercury vapor. This makes invisible ultraviolet (UV) light. The UV light hits a coating on the inside of the tube, which then gives off visible light. CFLs use about 75 percent less energy than incandescent bulbs. Saving energy helps the environment. Using less energy means less greenhouse gases will get into the air. Recycling CFLs Safely using and disposing of CFLs is very important to protecting our health and environment. Recycle spent CFLs to prevent mercury getting into the environment. Towns, cities, and some stores collect CFLs for recycling. What to do if a CFL is broken CFLs contain a small amount of mercury sealed in the glass tube. When a CFL bulb breaks, some of this mercury gets into the air as vapor. The broken bulb can release mercury vapor until it is cleaned up and removed. If a CFL gets broken, everyone needs to leave the room right away. Tell an adult about the broken CFL, so they can clean it up the right way. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 2 of 11 Vermicomposting Vermicomposting This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Worms can turn our old food into plant food. It's called vermicomposting. Vermicomposting can be fun, but it is also good for our planet! Worms are good for the Earth. Worms are good for fishing. Fun Worm Facts! á Red worms may live up to 4.5 years in the Worm Wigwam (compared to 1 year in the wild), and will grow to a length of up to 3 inches. á Red worms can live in a wide range of temperatures. They're happiest from 55-70 degrees, but can handle 45-80 degrees. á Red worms are hermaphrodites-they have both male and female sexual organs-and reproduce quickly in confinement. Their population may double or triple in 1 year. How Do You Vermicompost? 1. Make a dark house for the worms to live in. A wooden or plastic bin or other non-metal container. A bin 1.5 feet high x 2 feet deep x 3 feet wide is a good size for a household. Make drain holes near the bottom. 2. Fill the bin with moist bedding. Bedding can be paper or newspaper shredded, leaves, straw, peat moss, or sawdust. Make sure the bedding is kept very moist like a sponge. Change the bedding once or twice a year. 3. Feed the worms. 1. Yes! Fruit, vegetables, coffee grounds, bread, leaves. 2. No! Milk, oil, eggs, meat, fat, dog or cat feces. 4. Dig a hole in the bedding, dump the food in and cover it up with bedding. Pick a new spot each time you add food. 5. Keep them damp and warm. Add water if the bedding feels dry, but make sure the excess water can drain away. Cover the bin with plastic or a tarp during freezing weather. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 3 of 11 Reduce Waste Reduce Waste This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Reduce/Reduction: to make something smaller or use less, resulting in a smaller amount of waste. "Source reduction" is reducing waste before you purchase it, or by purchasing products that are not wasteful in their packaging or use. A key part of waste "reduction" is "conservation"-using natural resources wisely, and using less than usual in order avoid waste. You can practice reduction by selecting products that do not have to be added to landfills or the waste stream in general. This is really easy to do... á First and foremost, buy and use less! If all the other people on the Earth used as much "stuff" as we do in the United States, there would need to be three to five times more space just to hold and sustain everybody.... WOW! So buy only what you need and use all of what you buy. Or make sure that when you are through with something, you pass it along to other people who can continue to put it to good use. This is especially important when it comes things that can be dangerous to our environment, such as paint and chemicals. á Start making wise "package" selections. Why is it important to consider how something is packaged when you consider what to buy? You can reduce waste by selecting products that are not wasteful in their packaging. Flashy and fun packaging costs more, usually adds little or no value to the product, and (worst of all!) can do considerable harm to our environment by creating more waste or waste disposal difficulties. Keep the following package-related tips in mind no matter what you are buying: á Precycle by purchasing products in materials/packaging that can be readily recycled. So whenever you have a choice, put plain and recyclable packages high on your list to reduce packaging waste in our environment. á Avoid single-serve containers. You can buy juice or water in large recyclable bottles or cans and then divide it up in reusable, washable containers as you need it at home or to take with you. And if you want to take juice or water with you on your bike rides or to the ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 4 of 11 Reduce Waste gym, just take it along in your own reusable sports bottle. á Before you buy bottled water, first find out if you really even need bottled water. City water (and clean well water) is usually just as healthy, much cheaper, and may even be safer than bottled water products. á Refuse store bags! When you buy one or two items at a store, carry them out in your hands; or take a reusable bag with you to carry the items you buy. And don't forget to take your old plastic and paper bags back to the grocery store for reuse or recycling. Most grocery stores have convenient paper and plastic recycling bins located near the entrance. Hints for parents Think BIG! Buying in "bulk" (a large amount that is not divided into separate containers) gives you the best "product to package" ratio. Many stores allow shoppers to scoop out the amount they need of bulk goods like nuts or coffee. This considerably reduces waste and packaging materials. Or you can buy in bulk by selecting bigger quantities in a single box or packagefor example, buy the largest box of toothpaste, dishwasher detergent, or cereal, rather than a series of small boxes. This not only reduces the waste (from having to throw out the old containers) but it will also save you money. Packaging is expensive, so buying in larger volumes reduces the unit cost. Buy concentrates rather than diluted products-the result is less waste for disposal when it is empty. Use durable goods longer. Durable goods are sturdy things like furniture or household appliances that can (and should) be used for many years. You can save money and reduce waste by keeping these items longer and repairing them when they break, rather than buying new ones. Use durable items rather than disposable items whenever possible. For example, select reusable razors rather than the disposable one that you can only use a few times and then have to throw away. Say NO to junk mail! Call toll-free numbers in unwanted catalogs and ask to be removed from ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 5 of 11 Reduce Waste mailing lists. Whenever possible, use the Internet to obtain (and pay) bills, news, catalogs, stock reports and other information that usually comes to your house in a paper format. Reducing paper reduces waste. Start a garden. Food that you grow yourself does not have to be "processed" or "packaged", and no fossil fuels are needed to get it to the store and then to your house. Start a compost or vermiculture bin to transform your household garbage (food wastes, coffee grounds, etc. ), into a rich earth-like material that can be added to a garden to help plants grow. Grass, leaves, paper, and some other types of food can naturally decay and turn into compost, and that compost can then be put to good use in your garden. Replace lawns with mulched gardens that are just as pretty, but are better for our environment. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 6 of 11 Recycle Recycle This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Recycle-don't just toss everything in the trash. Lots of things (like cans, bottles, paper, and cardboard) can be remade into either the same kind of thing or new products. Making new items from recycled ones also takes less energy and fewer resources than making products from brand new materials. Just about anything in your home (or office or school, etc.) that cannot be reused CAN be recycled into something else. You'd be amazed what can be done with a recycled product! A recycled soda bottle, can be made into T-shirts, combs, or hundreds of other plastic goods that can be used for many years. Even your brand new computer case might be made from ordinary recycled plastics. And paper products can take on different forms as well; an old phone book or coloring book might become one of your school books or a notebook. Your recycling mission is not impossible! In fact, it is very simple: Don't throw away anything that can be recycled! Here is a list of things you may be able to recycle: á Aluminum cans á Cardboard á Electronic equipment á Glass (particularly bottles and jars) á Magazines á Metal á Newspaper á Paper á Plastic Bags á Plastic Bottles á Steel Cans á Writing/Copy Paper á Yard Waste (leaves, grass) Just ask your local recycling office (city, county, or state) about what can be recycled. Now isn't that easy? There is so much that YOU can do with very little effort. And the best part is you will probably save yourself a lot of money while you are at it! ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 7 of 11 Reuse Reuse This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. You can "reuse" materials in their original form instead of throwing them away, or pass those materials on to others who could use them too! Remember, one man's trash is another man's treasure! Here are some examples of reuse... á Take along washable cups or travel mugs instead of disposables; a lot of restaurants and stores will be glad to fill or refill your own mug. á When you do use disposables like plastic cups, plates, utensils, and plastic food storage bags, don't throw them away! Wash and reuse them-most of them will last for a long time with many uses. They may not cost much to replace, but it doesn't make any more sense to throw away those things than it does to throw away your bicycle after one use. Hints for Parents And speaking of bicycles (or other durable goods like washers, dryers, etc. ), why not repair them rather than replace them when they break? This is another form of "reuse." New is not always better, nor it is always necessary. You'll be helping your environment, but your pocketbook will thank you too! When you do decide to replace something large and "reusable," be sure to donate the old one to charitable outlets like Goodwill, Salvation Army, Habitat for Humanity, Vietnam Veterans, and the many others that are probably in your area. Most of the time the item can be repaired by those groups, and then redistributed into other homes rather than landfills. Hold a yard sale or give-away. And ask your neighbors to join in, too-this shares the work and increases the number of unused things that can find new homes and new uses. And your local recycling/solid waste office may run a "swap shop" at recycling centers. When you do need to purchase something, check those yard sales and charitable outlets first to see if they have what you need before selecting something new. Use cloth gift bags and stop ripping the paper off gifts! If you remove the wrapping paper carefully, you can use it again, and there's nothing wrong with doing just that! And don't forget to use canvas or cloth bags when shopping so you don't need to make the choice between ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 8 of 11 Reuse "paper or plastic." Use washable table napkins instead of paper napkins-cloth napkins are usually much larger and more absorbent than paper products, and they can dress up your dinner table too! New baby? Buy washable cotton diapers (look for them at yard sales or charitable outlets). Check the yellow pages to see if there is a diaper service in your area. If you select those with Velcro wraps, reusable diapers are just as convenient and may even be cheaper than disposable diapers. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 9 of 11 Help Eliminate Waste Help Eliminate Waste This text is adapted from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Reduce, Reuse, Recycle - Three great ways YOU can eliminate waste and protect your environment! Waste, and how we choose to handle it, affects our world's environment-that's YOUR environment. The environment is everything around you including the air, water, land, plants, and man-made things. And since by now you probably know that you need a healthy environment for your own health and happiness, you can understand why effective waste management is so important to YOU and everyone else. The waste we create has to be carefully controlled to be sure that it does not harm your environment and your health. What exactly is "waste?" Waste is anything we throw away or get rid of, that doesn't get used. How can you help? You can help by learning about and practicing the three R's of waste management: Reduce, reuse, and recycle! Practicing all three of these activities every day is not only important for a healthy environment, but it can also be fun too. So let's take a minute right now to learn more about waste and waste management, so you can become a key player in making our world a safe and healthy place. Compact Fluorescent Lights Saving energy means less greenhouse gases will get into the air. NIEHS's "Worm Wigwams' Welcome Wiggle Waste Watchers Composting bins use worms to turn organic waste into usable mulch. Recycle Your recycling mission is not impossible! In fact, it is very simple: Don't throw away anything that can be recycled. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 10 of 11 Help Eliminate Waste Reduce Waste A key part of waste "reduction" is "conservation" -- using natural resources wisely, and using less than usual in order to avoid waste. Reuse You can "reuse" materials in their original form instead of throwing them away, or pass those materials on to others who could use them too! Vermicomposting Worms can turn our old food into plant food. It's called vermicomposting. Vermicomposting can be fun, but it is also good for our planet! ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 11 of 11