Farmers Care for the Land Farmers Care for the Land Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. You probably know that most of the food you see in grocery stores is grown on farms. Farmers may grow crops, raise animals, or both. No matter what type of food they produce, farmers also focus on the best ways to care for the land. In this way, farmers can be conservationists! In the western United States, some ranchers raise cattle on the prairie, or grasslands. Ranchers work with conservation groups to help preserve the grasslands. The groups work to remove invasive plants that don't belong on the prairie. Invasive plants can take over and kill off native plants. This is bad for the cattle and for the wildlife that only eat native plants. Ranchers can also work with conservation groups to protect wildlife on the prairie. There are wild animals, like elk, mule deer, and pronghorn, that live on the prairie. These animals migrate across the prairie with the seasons. Ranchers are learning to use special fencing, to help keep migrating animals safe on their journeys. Wildlife-friendly fencing also keeps cattle safe. In other parts of the United States, farmers who raise crops need to choose what to plant in their fields. Different types of crops grow better in certain types of soil. Farmers test their soil. Farmers may add nutrients such as fertilizer to their soil to help the crops grow. Since the soil is so important to a farmer's work, some groups of farmers are taking steps to protect their soil in a new way. The work they're doing can also help to slow down climate change. One of the causes of climate change is too much carbon in the air. Plants absorb carbon from the air. So farmers can use different planting practices to help with the carbon in the air. To help protect the soil, many farmers have started using plants called cover crops. After harvesting crops like corn or soybeans, they plant cover crops such as rye or winter peas. In the spring, the cover crops die, break down, and feed the soil with nutrients. Farmers can then plant their normal crops right over the cover crops. This process of using cover crops helps the environment in a few ways. First, when the dead cover crops break down into the soil, carbon doesn't go back into the air. Instead, because the cover crops have deep roots, the carbon stays in the ground. Second, the deep roots help the soil stay put, in the fields, where it belongs. The roots stop the soil from washing into waterways. This is important because soil that washes into water can clog the water and kill ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Farmers Care for the Land fish. If a farmer adds fertilizer to soil and the soil washes into water, the fertilizer can cause algae to grow. Too much algae can poison the water. Plus, if soil washes away, it's lost forever. And finally, because cover crops add nutrients to the soil, farmers can use less fertilizer. This means less danger of pollution or contamination. Fred Yoder is a farmer who lives in Ohio. He runs a farm that his father used to run. His children are learning to be farmers also. He says that because of technology, fewer workers can grow more crops than ever before. But farm life is changing because of climate change. Planting seasons, growing seasons, and the time of harvest are changing as weather patterns change. Farming organizations are sharing information to help farmers. Yoder gets excited about trying new things to make farming better. He is using cover crops on his farm. This is a new idea that his father never used. As younger people learn about farming, they can learn more about technology, too. Using information from professional conservation groups and farming organizations will help them make better decisions in the future. Fred Yoder says they will make the land better for the next generation of farmers. ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 