How to Find Fish without Seeing Them How to Find Fish without Seeing Them Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. Researchers at the Tennessee Aquarium are working on a project to find two types of fish. They are looking for bridled darters and blue shiners in the Coosa River basin area. The bridled darter is a small fish named for a stripe across its snout. The stripe looks just like a horse bridle, the leather strap that fits around a horse's head and nose. The blue shiner is a 4-inch-long minnow that is bluish in color. Scientists want to find ways to protect these fish so they don't die out. But first, they need to figure out where the fish are, and where the fish are not. Researchers study streams and rivers looking for these and other threatened fish. They also look for invasive species-the animals that don't belong there, but are trying to move in and take over. Invasive animals and plants can kill off native species. The work to find certain fish and wildlife can be difficult and take a long time. The researchers have to be in the right place at the right time to catch sight of the animal they want to find. But now, researchers are using a new way to find and track animals in and near water... without seeing them! They are using environmental DNA, or eDNA. All plants and animals have DNA in every cell. DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid. It is a molecule that carries important information in every cell. In humans, DNA tells every cell in our bodies how to grow. It's in our organs, including our skin. Plus, it's in our blood, sweat, and even poop. The same is true for fish! When fish swim in streams and rivers, they lose skin cells and poop in the water. That means they leave their DNA in the water. Scientists have learned how to find a tiny amount of DNA in water and use it to find fish. They use a process called PCR, which stands for polymerase chain reaction. Here's how it works: First, the researchers take a sample of water from the stream or river they are studying. Then, they go to a laboratory. They analyze the water sample, looking for bits of DNA. When they find some, they mix the DNA with a special liquid. The liquid helps the DNA grow and multiply. This makes the tiny bit of DNA much bigger. Then, a special machine can analyze the DNA and tell the scientists what species the DNA comes from. Those are the species in the water! Using eDNA gives researchers a new tool to help fish. Researchers are even taking eDNA samples from soil, too! That will allow them to help many more hard-to-see species in the future. ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 