Cleaning Up Ocean Pollution: Collecting "Ghost" Fishing Gear Cleaning Up Ocean Pollution: Collecting "Ghost" Fishing Gear Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. Did you know more than 10% of the pollution in the ocean is old fishing gear? Some of it got lost by accident or mistake. Some of it might have been thrown overboard from boats on purpose. Some people call these items "ghost gear." And the ghost gear is causing big problems for wildlife in the ocean. From California to Florida to Maine, people are worried about how ghost gear is hurting ocean wildlife. When ghost gear ends up in the ocean, it sometimes keeps fishing. Old lobster and crab cages, fishing nets, and fishing lines trap helpless animals that can't escape. They often die. Plus, lost equipment is often worth a lot of money. When it ends up in the ocean, millions of dollars are wasted. Sometimes the old equipment can even damage boats. But across the United States, organizations are working to help solve the ghost gear problem! In Maine, there is an organization that is focused on making a healthy ecosystem for lobsters and people. This organization, the Gulf of Maine Lobster Foundation, held special events for cleaning up lost lobster crates. Over a single weekend, more than 100 volunteers on boats searched for and collected lost and broken lobster cages. The volunteers collected more than 3,000 traps! They returned 1,000 traps to their owners. They recycled 21 tons of steel from the non-useable traps. The money they earned from recycling was put back into the project. Now, they're working on collecting old fishing nets from professional fishers. They hope to recycle 280 tons of fishing gear! In California, a group called Wildcoast is also getting ready to collect old fishing nets. They are setting up five different places to collect ghost fishing gear. The people at Wildcoast think they will be able to recycle 60 tons of unused fishing nets. A group of fishers and a research center from Mississippi State University got together to work on the ocean pollution problem in Louisiana. They placed giant recycling bins at popular harbors for people to turn in old fishing gear. People who register with the program will receive a cash reward for all the gear they turn in. These projects will encourage people to stop throwing old fishing gear in the water. The best way to protect the ocean from old fishing gear is to prevent the equipment from getting left behind. Programs like these also help to clean up what was already left behind. In this way, people can help protect the ocean and wildlife. ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 