From the Sun to Your Food From the Sun to Your Food by Caitlyn Meagher All living things need energy to move and grow. Energy can come in many different forms. For example, light energy, heat energy, and chemical energy are all different forms of energy. While energy cannot be created nor destroyed, it can be converted between different forms. Where do plants get their energy? They get their energy from the sun. Plants absorb sunlight with their leaves. They use the sun's energy to change water and carbon dioxide into plant food and oxygen. This chemical process is called photosynthesis. Photosynthesis means, "making out of light." The energy from the sun, light energy, is converted into chemical energy through photosynthesis. Plants are called producers because they produce their own food. Producers form the base of every food chain in an ecosystem. Plants are eaten by animals, which are eaten by larger animals. Through this process, energy from the sun is transferred from one living thing to another. For example, a plant captures energy from the sun and turns it into plant food. Later, that plant might be eaten by a rabbit, giving the rabbit energy. Then, a human eats the rabbit. The energy the human gets from the food was originally energy from the sun! The food humans eat provides us with energy. When we chew and digest food, a chemical reaction takes place. The energy produced from this reaction fuels our bodies. We require energy from food for basic functions like moving and breathing. Energy from food also helps our body repair itself and stay warm. The amount of energy we get from food depends on which nutrients are in the food we eat. Whole foods, like kale, contain lots of important nutrients, such as calcium and potassium. Sugary foods, like candy, do not contain as many nutrients. Whole foods can help us sustain our energy over long periods of time. Notice how you feel when you eat whole foods like vegetables and fruits. Are you more energized throughout the day? 