Article-A-Day The Galaxy and the Universe 7 Articles Check articles you have read: The Big Bang 89 words The Milky Way Galaxy 306 words Meet the Ologist: Neil deGrasse Tyson 2070 words How Did the Universe Begin? 138 words One-On-One With the Sun 1652 words In Pictures: Journey to the Stars 1522 words In Pictures: Beyond Planet Earth 1387 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Articles generously provided by American Museum of Natural History are included. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Page 1 of 16 The Big Bang The Big Bang This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. 1. About 13 billion years ago, the universe began as a tiny, dense fireball that exploded. 2. In the early years, everything was made of gas. This gas, mostly hydrogen and helium, expanded and cooled. 3. Over billions of years, gravity caused gas and dust to form galaxies, stars, planets, and more. 4. The matter that spread out from the Big Bang developed into everything in the universe -even YOU! 5. Most astronomers use this theory to explain how the universe began, but what caused this explosion in the first place is a mystery. ReadWorks.org © 2015 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 2 of 16 The Milky Way Galaxy The Milky Way Galaxy This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. The Milky Way is a huge collection of stars, dust, and gas. It's called a spiral galaxy because if you could view it from the top, it would look like a spinning pinwheel. The Sun is located on one of the spiral arms, about 25,000 light-years away from the center of the galaxy. Even if you could travel at the speed of light (186,000 miles per second), it would take you about 25,000 years to reach the middle of the Milky Way. The Milky Way gets its name from a Greek myth about the goddess Hera who sprayed milk across the sky. In other parts of the world, our galaxy goes by other names. In China it's called the "Silver River," and in the Kalahari Desert in Southern Africa, it's called the "Backbone of Night." If you could see our galaxy from the side, it would look like a huge, thin disk with a slight bump in the center. This flat shape is caused by the galaxy spinning around. Everything in our spinning galaxy would fly off into space if it weren't for the force of gravity. Without a telescope, we can see about 6,000 stars from Earth. That may seem like a lot of stars, but it's actually only a small part of the whole. If you think of the entire galaxy as a giant pizza, all the stars you can see from Earth fall within about one pepperoni on that pizza. In fact, for every star you can see, there are more than 20 million you cannot see. Most of the stars are too faint, too far away, or blocked by clouds of cosmic dust. ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 3 of 16 Meet the Ologist: Neil deGrasse Tyson Meet the Ologist: Neil deGrasse Tyson by American Museum of Natural History This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. Does it bug you that you can't get closer to the things you study? Neil Said: No, It's the very nature of the subject. I mean, if you were frustrated by the distance, you wouldn't be studying astrophysics, you'd be studying some tabletop science. Part of the fascination is that you can't touch it. It's quite humbling. You can't interfere with it, you can't pollute it, you can't change it. It's like fishing - you're just sitting there, hoping the fish will bite your bait. As a kid, what did you do when you wanted to learn more about space? Neil Said: When I was eleven, I took my first course at the Hayden Planetarium on astronomy and astrophysics. Most of the material was over my head, but that didn't matter. What I did learn was that the science I was interested in requires real math, real physics. So at eleven I began to shape my life so that I could get that math and physics background. It changed my study of the universe from an exercise in simply looking up to an exercise in learning about the forces and laws of nature. Did you ever go to space camp? Neil Said: No, I went to astronomy camp in Arizona, when I was fourteen - my first real trip away from New York City's light and air pollution. That's where I noticed that in fact the real sky was a pretty good approximation of the one I saw in the Hayden Planetarium. Space camp today is actually for training to be an astronaut. I never wanted to be an astronaut. What's the difference between an astrophysicist and an astronomer? Neil Said: In fact there's no difference. It's just that astrophysics reasserts the role of physics in understanding how the universe works. In the late 1800s we learned that light from the universe could be analyzed with a prism, which allowed us to figure out all sorts of things about planets, stars, and galaxies, especially their chemical composition and whether they are in motion through space. From then on, scientists began to think about the universe as it related to the laws of physics. What's the hardest thing to explain about the universe? ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 4 of 16 Meet the Ologist: Neil deGrasse Tyson Neil Said: The hardest thing, I think by far, is how we analyze spectra - light broken up into its component colors. It's so abstract, so removed from the actual object we're studying. See, chemists can study actual chemicals in the lab. Biologists can study actual plants. But astrophysicists can't go out there and grab a piece of a galaxy and put it in a laboratory. We have to study a picture of the thing, and then analyze the light that comes from it. Ninety-nine percent of everything we know about the machinery of our universe comes to us through the analysis of light. What would the world look like if we could see invisible light such as radio waves? Neil Said: Completely different. If you could tune your eyeballs to see radio waves, the antennas on top of tall buildings would be aglow from TV and radio broadcasts. If you could tune your eyes to microwaves, then the police officer standing on the edge of the highway with a radar gun would be the brightest thing on the horizon. If you had infrared eyes you'd see people glowing from their body temperature. Visible light is such a tiny slice of the whole spectrum that we are essentially blind. New telescopes can see these other kinds of light and tell us amazing things about the universe. If you could send a spacecraft somewhere, where would you send it? Neil Said: Jupiter's moon, Europa. It's got a kilometer of ice on its surface, nothing unusual, but what is unusual is that that ice appears to be floating on an ocean of liquid water. It looks a lot like what we see in the Arctic Ocean. And the oceans are where life began on Earth. Perhaps a form of life developed in the oceans of Europa. I want to cut a hole and go ice fishing and see what's down there. It'll happen in the next twenty or thirty years. How come you never wanted to be an astronaut? Neil Said: Because astronauts just went into orbit 200 miles above Earth's surface, no farther than Boston is from New York City. At best they went to the Moon. I was fascinated by the space program and I still am. But my scope, my sense of what I wanted to do in life, extended to the outer reaches of the universe. What do you remember about your first visit to the Hayden Planetarium? Neil Said: I was nine years old when I first visited the Hayden Planetarium and I felt as though I could see forever. In the Planetarium's starry dome I saw thousands of stars, ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 5 of 16 Meet the Ologist: Neil deGrasse Tyson essentially an uncountable number. And I was pretty convinced that it was a hoax - that it couldn't be the case! I know how many stars there were, because I'd seen them from the Bronx, New York, where I'd grown up. Which was the real sky, the thousand-star-studded sky of the dome, or the sky I recognized? That conflict got me started. How did your stargazing career begin? Neil Said: I was about eleven when a friend of mine lent me a pair of binoculars. I'd used them at sporting events, but my friend encouraged me to look up. That's when I saw the Moon for the first time. It wasn't just bigger, it was better. It was a world unto itself. This object that floats above us, that we all take for granted, became a place that I could imagine being, because I saw the mountains and valleys and craters. I thought to myself, if binoculars could do this what could mountaintop telescopes do? And you know, 15 years later I was using mountaintop telescopes, which was an immeasurably bigger and better experience. When did you get your first telescope? Neil Said: I was in seventh grade. It was a birthday gift from my parents. It wasn't one of these wishful gifts that parents buy after thinking, "Oh wouldn't it be great if Junior gets a chemistry set to get him interested in chemistry." No, I'd already demonstrated a strong interest in the universe. It was a simple telescope, I think it cost $50, but that's all you need to show real details on the Moon's surface or the rings of Saturn. Why is Saturn your favorite planet? Neil Said: Oh, it's the most beautiful thing out there. No matter who you are, no matter your state of mind, if you look at Saturn your mouth drops open. If life ever gets you low, just pull out a telescope and look at Saturn. You say, "My gosh there's a world out there, with a ring around it - how cool can you get!" How did you meet other amateur astronomers? Neil Said: Through the Amateur Astronomers Association of New York. Anyone can join, at any age, as long as you're interested in the universe. A telescope can come later. I happened to join when I was thirteen and attended all their observing sessions, which are called "star ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 6 of 16 Meet the Ologist: Neil deGrasse Tyson parties." The dues at the time included a subscription to Sky & Telescope magazine, which is a hobbyist's dream. There, in this magazine, appeared article after article about my favorite subject. Most cities in the country have organizations of amateur astronomers. To be an amateur astronomer is actually a badge of pride. How are new technologies changing what we know about the universe? Neil Said: Advances in our knowledge of the universe have always marched in step with advances in technology. For example, fifty years ago, there was only one view of the universe, and it was through the visible part of the spectrum of light. But now, every window of light in the universe is now open to us. We now have telescopes on Earth and in orbit that are sensitive to gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet, infrared, microwaves, and to radio waves. It's all just light - it just happens to be invisible to the naked eye. What does light tell us about the universe? Neil Said: Different objects and phenomena in space give off different kinds of light. And that light tells us all kinds of things: what an object is made of, how old it is, whether it's moving towards or away from us, whether it's spinning. Studying the light from these distant objects is the most fundamental way we know anything about the universe. How has the space program changed astrophysics? Neil Said: The space program enabled us to visit the solar system as though it were our backyard. It transformed the solar system into a laboratory, mainly because now we can make little robots that get up there faster and easier and don't have to be brought back. But that's just nearby. What question do you get asked most often? Neil Said: The number one question is, "Is there life elsewhere in the universe?" Given the sheer scale of the universe, and given how quickly life formed on Earth, and given that life is made out of the most common ingredients in the universe, there's no question that life exists ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 7 of 16 Meet the Ologist: Neil deGrasse Tyson elsewhere. It took only 200 million years - just 4% of Earth's total history - to jumpstart life. History has shown us that the more we think we're special, the more we find out we're not. So get used to it! You study the structure of our galaxy, the Milky Way. What makes this hard to do? Neil Said: The Milky Way is our home, and it's very difficult to know the structure of something if you're embedded within it. It's as difficult as an unborn child trying to figure out what its mother looks like. Imagine one of the blueberries in a blueberry pancake. If the pancake is our entire Milky Way Galaxy and the Sun was in the center of the blueberry, the farthest we can see is the edge of the berry. So we use radio waves and other techniques that can penetrate through the pancake (through the galaxy) to try to see what's out there. What are some tricky questions astrophysicists wrestle with? Neil Said: Oh, big, grand questions like, will we expand forever, what's the shape of the universe? That sort of thing. But there are some questions that hit home. For example, when is the next asteroid going to hit Earth? But people shouldn't worry about the next collision, 'cause when it happens you'll be dead. If it doesn't happen, you'll be fine. I'm not worried, it's just part of the cycle of life. An asteroid took out the dinosaurs 65 million years ago and enabled the mammals of the day to rise up from the underbrush and lead to species that today include humans. We're here because of an asteroid. ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 8 of 16 How Did the Universe Begin? How Did the Universe Begin? This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. In the 1920s in California, astronomer Edwin Hubble observed distant galaxies using an extremely powerful telescope. He made two mind-boggling discoveries. First, Hubble figured out that the Milky Way isn't the only galaxy. He realized that faint, cloudlike objects in the night sky are actually other galaxies far, far away. The Milky Way is just one of billions of galaxies. Second, Hubble discovered that the galaxies are constantly moving away from each other. In other words, the universe is expanding. The biggest thing that we know about is getting bigger all the time. A few years later, Belgian astronomer Georges Lema”tre used Hubble's amazing discoveries to suggest an answer to a big astronomy question: "How did the universe begin?" This breakthrough idea later became known as... ReadWorks.org © 2015 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 9 of 16 One-On-One With the Sun One-On-One With the Sun by American Museum of Natural History This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. Hey, Stella Stardust here. Welcome to another cosmic conversation. Let's give a warm welcome to the Sun! STELLA: You know, everyone here on Earth loves your work. If it weren't for you, we wouldn't be here. SUN: Thanks, Stella. I've been cranking out energy for billions of years-and not one day off. STELLA: Impressive. Your agent told me that you're the biggest star in the universe. Is that true? SUN: Actually, no. My agent tends to exaggerate. I'm just a medium-sized star. To my fans on Earth, I look much bigger than the other stars in the sky. That's because I'm much closer to you than the other stars. I'm 93 million miles away from you. The bigger stars are millions of times farther away from your planet. STELLA: I can't believe it. You, the Sun, are just an average, ordinary, run-of-the-mill star! SUN: Hey, take it easy. I may be an average star, but I'm still a LOT bigger than your puny planet. Guess how many Earth-sized planets could fit inside me? STELLA: I don't know. Maybe ten? SUN: Not even close! More than a million! I'm big and I've got lots of mass. That's why I've got a lot of gravity. You guys don't call this the Solar system for nothing. "Solar" means "sun." This is my show. All the planets, comets, and asteroids orbit around ME. STELLA: I know you star types tend to be touchy about age, but how old are you? SUN: Well, I began shining about 4.6 billion years ago. It was so long ago I don't remember the exact day. STELLA: Was it a Sunday? Just kidding. Actually, I'm curious to know how stars begin. What's your story? SUN: We stars begin as huge spinning clouds of gas and dust. Gravity pulls the gas and dust ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 10 of 16 One-On-One With the Sun together in round clumps, which get hot. At that point, we're called protostars. Eventually we get hot enough to start fusing hydrogen atoms together, which releases energy. Then we really shine. Stars are born in batches, which are like star nurseries. Then, over millions of years, these stars drift apart and spread out around the galaxy. STELLA: Let's turn to a delicate subject. How do stars die? SUN: After stars like me shine for billions of years, we eventually run out of fuel. When that happens, we swell up as much as 100 times bigger and are called red giants. Astronomers predict that I'll eventually become a red giant. At that time, my heat will vaporize the inner planets - Mercury, Venus, and Earth STELLA: That sounds really scary. SUN: Don't worry. That won't happen for about 5 billion years! After I become a red giant, I'll lose my outer gas layers and reveal my inner core, known as a white dwarf. When I'm a white dwarf, I'll be only as big as Earth, but still very hot, and very dense. Finally, I'll cool down and disappear from view. STELLA: I hear that some stars die differently. What's a supernova? SUN: When a star more massive than I gets old and runs out of nuclear fuel, it blows up in a great flash of light called a supernova. This explosion splatters the star's guts in all directions. STELLA: I'd like to show the people at home a picture of a star that exploded as a supernova. Its remains are called the Crab Nebula. SUN: What a mess that star made. Want to know something amazing? Humans saw this star explode in the year 1054. But the explosion actually happened about 6,000 years before that. STELLA: Huh? SUN: I'll explain. Stars give off light, right? Light travels incredibly fast - at a speed of 186,000 ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 11 of 16 One-On-One With the Sun miles per second. Light can travel from Earth to the Moon in about one second. My sunlight reaches you Earthlings in about eight minutes. Most stars are much farther away. That's why astronomers don't use miles when they talk about the distances between stars. That's like describing the distance between New York and Los Angeles in inches! Astronomers talk about light-years. A light-year is the distance light travels in one year. Since the star in that picture was about 6,000 light-years away from Earth when it exploded, it took about 6,000 years for us to get the "newsflash." STELLA: In Hollywood, I meet a lot of people filled with hot air. What gases are inside you? SUN: Ah, you want to know what gives me that special glow! Well, like most other stars, I'm made up of mostly two gases, hydrogen and helium. These light gases stay close to me because of my massive gravity. Inside, I'm so hot that I use a fancy process called thermonuclear fusion. By turning hydrogen into helium, I create lots of energy. It makes me shine. STELLA: This may be a little rude, but what are those dark splotches on you? Are those, like, star "zits"? SUN: (sigh) No, those dark splotches are called sunspots. All normal stars have them. They look dark because they're cooler than the gases around them. By the way, when I say "cooler," keep in mind that my outside is about 10,000¡ F. That's many times hotter than the hottest kitchen oven. My inner core is even hotter, something like 30,000,000¡ F. STELLA: Is there anything else you'd like to say? SUN: You think your sunglasses are "star-shaped," right? STELLA: Sure. SUN: Well, if they were really "star-shaped," they'd be round. You Earthlings have the strange idea that stars have points. We don't. Gravity keeps us shaped like spheres. STELLA: Thanks to the Sun for a great interview. Good night. ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 12 of 16 In Pictures: Journey to the Stars In Pictures: Journey to the Stars by American Museum of Natural History This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. Hi, we're Mordecai-Mark Mac Low and Rebecca Oppenheimer. We are astrophysicists at the American Museum of Natural History. Did you know that stars are really important to us? In fact, they make all life possible. Let's find out why! Twinkle, twinkle, little star... On a clear night, we can see thousands of stars with our naked eye. In the Milky Way Galaxy alone, there are hundreds of billions of stars. And there are many more in the universe. But did you know that a long, long time ago, there were no stars at all? Over 13 billion years ago, there was only an invisible substance called dark matter, along with hydrogen and helium gas. Dark matter's gravity gathered this gas to form the first stars. But the first stars didn't last long. They were massive. They burned hot, lived fast, and died young. They blew up in gigantic explosions called supernovas. Stars are factories for new elements. As stars live and die, they form almost all of the elements that we know of, like oxygen and carbon. Earth orbits a star we call the Sun. It is a middle-aged yellow star that is more massive than the average star. The Sun is a star that powers our planet. It brightens our days and provides us with heat and other forms of energy. The Sun, like all stars, is a huge glowing ball of hot gas. It gives off energy as light that we can see-sunshine. It also gives off invisible light, such as ultraviolet and radio. At the end of its life, the Sun will become a red giant. It will blow its outer layers out into the universe, seeding new stars and planets. But don't worry. This won't happen for 5 billion ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 13 of 16 In Pictures: Journey to the Stars years. Scientists observe stars using telescopes on Earth and in space. They see stars being born, maturing, and at the ends of their lives. This is the Orion Nebula. Huge stellar nurseries like this are found all over the Milky Way and other spiral galaxies. See those teardrop shapes? They are gas and dust clouds that cradle infant stars. Most stars form in tightly packed groups called star clusters. The Pleiades is an older star cluster than the one in Orion. Young stars are leaving this cluster, too. Scientists also observe stars at the ends of their lives. The remains of one of these stars formed the Helix Nebula. All that remains of the star is a very dense object called a white dwarf. It will take billions of years to cool and slowly fade away. Brown dwarfs are neither stars nor planets. And they are as numerous as stars! The discovery of these new objects tells us that our cosmic family is more diverse than we imagined. ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 14 of 16 In Pictures: Beyond Planet Earth In Pictures: Beyond Planet Earth This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. What would it be like to travel across the solar system and explore space? Hi, I'm Mike Shara, an astrophysicist at the American Museum of Natural History. Let's take a look at some of the places that humans might go someday, and the questions that scientists are asking. Our closest neighbor is the Moon. Did you know that only 12 people have ever set foot on its near-black, powdery surface? No one has been to the Moon since 1972. But today, many scientists want to send people and robots back there. What do you think it would be like to live and work on the Moon? When and if humans return to the Moon, they might want to set up a base camp. Astronauts could eat, sleep, bathe, and work in an expandable spacecraft like this one. The Moon would be a great place to do astronomy. There is no atmosphere to block the view! Scientists can set up a liquid mirror telescope that could detect light from the earliest days of the universe. Scientists are also working on an idea of a lunar elevator. Secured to a cable from a space station to the Moon, it would help transport goods and people between Earth and the Moon. Orbiting beyond the Moon is an asteroid named Itokawa. This space rock is huge. It's longer than 50 school buses! Itokawa is one of more than 7,000 near-Earth asteroids in our solar system. Can humans visit these space rocks? It's definitely a possibility. Learning more about asteroids could help scientists learn to deflect ones that get too close to Earth. Next stop: Mars. Today, this red planet is cold and dry. But millions of tons of liquid water once flowed on its surface. Could life have thrived there? Scientists want to find out. ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 15 of 16 In Pictures: Beyond Planet Earth NASA is sending the Curiosity rover to Mars. This robot is like a roving science lab. It can pick up samples and test them onboard. And it can fire a laser at rocks to see what they're made of! Someday, humans might go to Mars too. The Nautilus-Xspacecraft could carry a crew of nine on a two-year voyage, which is long enough to reach Mars. Astronauts would sleep in spinning compartments. As it spins, passengers are pushed against the outer walls. The artificial gravity would help prevent bone loss and other health problems. Exercise machines would help astronauts keep their muscles and bones strong. Solid waste from toilets could be used as compost for plants. The plants in turn would provide food and oxygen. Mars' surface is cold and barren. But the ingredients for a warm, wet, fertile environment are all there. They're just frozen underground. Could we turn Mars into a livable planet? Some scientists think so! Transforming Mars into an Earthlike planet would take hundreds or even thousands of years. And it would be very expensive. But we could learn a lot about how climates and ecosystems work. Further out our solar system is the giant planet Jupiter. Did you know that it has at least 50 moons? One of its moon is the ice-covered Europa. Scientists think that there may be a deep saltwater ocean beneath Europa's icy surface. On Earth, life exists wherever there is water. Is the same true on this moon? Future missions may find out! ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 16 of 16