Preserving Grasslands Preserving Grasslands Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. The northern grasslands of the United States stretch from the Dakotas to the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. They are also known as prairies. Researchers are learning that grasslands may help slow down some of the climate change caused by global warming. The Earth is getting warmer for many reasons. The biggest cause is the increase of carbon dioxide in the Earth's atmosphere. Carbon dioxide traps heat from the sun. Carbon dioxide goes into the air when humans burn fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas. Carbon dioxide is also released into the air during wildfires. Plants absorb some carbon dioxide from the air. They convert carbon dioxide and water into their food. And the bigger the plant, the more carbon dioxide it absorbs. Based on this knowledge, people often want to plant more trees to help slow climate change. And trees are important. But researchers in California believe that in some areas with wildfires, grasslands hold carbon even better than trees. While trees have roots below ground, most of a tree is above ground. So, when a wildfire burns trees, a lot of the carbon from the trees is released back into the air. But grasslands are the opposite. Grasses have long roots that go deep into the soil. The roots are usually bigger than the parts of the plants that you can see above the ground! The grasses in grasslands push some of the carbon dioxide into their root systems and into the soil. So when a wildfire burns in a grassland, less carbon gets released into the air. Grasses' long roots keep more of the carbon in the ground. There are many different types of grasses and flowers growing in the prairies. Some of the grasses include western wheatgrass, blue grama, and switchgrass. They grow with flowers like purple coneflower, hairy sunflower, and bladderpod. This variety of plants is important for many reasons. They offer food to pollinators like insects and bats. They support special birds that only live there, such as the sage-grouse and burrowing owl. They also support all sorts of mammals. Small mammals, such as the prairie dog, and large mammals, such as elk and pronghorn, are just some of the animals that call the prairie their home. Most of this landscape is owned by ranchers. They raise cattle, who enjoy eating some of the grasses in the prairie. Both cattle and wildlife need the same grasslands to live. Ranchers are leading some conservation groups and working with others to help care for the grasslands. ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Preserving Grasslands Caring for the landscape helps both cattle and wildlife. And now there is another reason to preserve the grasslands: saving grasslands can be part of people's efforts to slow climate change. ---- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 