Article-A-Day Health and Our Environment 7 Articles Check articles you have read: Carbon Monoxide 110 words Mercury, the Poison 179 words Environmental Justice 1020 words Radon Problems 128 words Lead Poisoning 636 words Asthma and Allergies and their Environmental Triggers 394 words What Are Electric and Magnetic Fields? 253 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 12 Carbon Monoxide Carbon Monoxide This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Carbon monoxide is an odorless, colorless gas that comes from burning things like kerosene, coal, or wood. It is a poison. Breathing air containing only a very small amount of carbon monoxide can cause carbon monoxide poisoning. Carbon monoxide replaces oxygen in the blood. If you breathe carbon monoxide you may experience á symptoms like the flu or a cold á blurred vision á stomach aches á trouble breathing á sleepiness á ringing in the ears Carbon monoxide can come from á broken gas water heaters and furnaces á space heaters that don't have vents á gas clothes dryers á tobacco smoke á fuels burned in wood and gas stoves Carbon monoxide detectors help prevent carbon monoxide poisoning in the home. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 2 of 12 Mercury, the Poison Mercury, the Poison This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Mercury is a natural metal that is a poison. It is a heavy, odorless, shiny, silver-white liquid. Sometimes it's called quicksilver. Liquid mercury can evaporate and end up in the air. Only a few drops of mercury is enough to poison the air in a room. Volcanoes and the earth's crust release some mercury into the air. Coal-burning power plants and waste burning also release mercury into the air. Mercury in the air falls back to earth. It gets into lakes and oceans and can end up in fish. There is some mercury in fluorescent light bulbs and CFL bulbs. Even though you can't see the mercury, a broken bulb can release mercury into the room. Mercury also has been used in some thermometers, barometers, gauges, switches, and thermostats. Never touch mercury. Never play with mercury. If liquid mercury touches your skin, it can get into your body and make you sick. If you find some mercury or some mercury spills, do not touch it. Tell an adult so they can clean it up the right way. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 3 of 12 Environmental Justice Environmental Justice This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. "Environmental Justice" is the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and policies. But what does that really mean? Let's break it down and see: The environment refers to everything around you. It is your home, your, school, and where you play. And if you have a job, it's also refers to where you work. It includes your friends' and grandparents' homes, and any other places that you visit. It includes the lake where you might swim or fish, the places where your food is grown or prepared, and even the places your drinking water travels through on its way to your home. Justice means fair treatment-fair treatment for everyone! So Environmental Justice is a new term that simply means making sure that everyone has a fair chance of living the healthiest life possible. The opportunity to have a healthy life often depends on where someone lives, plays, and works-yes, it depends on their environment! So it is important that ALL environments are free of unhealthy materials. Unhealthy materials can cause illness and sometimes even death. So Environmental Justice specifically refers to being sure that everyone has a fair chance of finding housing, employment, and a good education, all in a safe and protected environment. Where are these unhealthy environments? They can be anywhere where steps have not been taken to remove the dangers. For example, some homes are unhealthy environments. There are people who still have to live in places with dangerous levels of lead. Many years ago, lead was used in paint, and more recently lead was used in gasoline products. So in some places it might still be present in the old paint used on the walls or even on old painted furniture. Lead can make children sick and interfere with their ability to learn. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 4 of 12 Environmental Justice Another unhealthy environment would be homes or schools where there are certain insects, such as roaches, or other animals (mice, rats, etc.) that may leave droppings. Animal droppings can increase asthma attacks in persons who already have asthma, and they can actually cause asthma in others. Another unhealthy environment could be a playground that is near a chemical plant or a waste disposal site, or land that was previously the site of a gas station. If you play near such areas you may come in contact with hazardous substances that are still stored in the area, or that have seeped into the soil or water. Or you could be exposed to toxic (poisonous) gases released in the air from local plants or factories, large and small. And you've probably heard of the dangers of chemical spills, or of chemical wastes being improperly dumped in an area, exposing the people who live nearby and contaminating our water sources. Employees of companies dealing with unhealthy materials are also at risk, since there are many things in the workplace that are hazardous to human health. For example, the people who work in chemical factories must be protected from exposures to the chemicals they produce or handle. And people who work in coal mines have to be protected from inhaling "soot," which causes black lung disease. Even farming can involve exposure to environmental contaminants, such as insecticides or fertilizers. And animal production facilities (like poultry or hog farms) can adversely affect our environment if not managed properly. Work in seemingly health-conscious environments, like hospitals, may place employees at risk too. For example, although X-rays are important tools for helping people identify their illnesses, people who work with X-rays may be harmed if they are not protected when using these machines. They either step behind a shield or wear protective coverings to prevent exposures. Have you ever been to the dentist and had your teeth X-rayed? Then probably you remember that they put a heavy apron over your body during the process. The apron was there to protect you from any unnecessary exposure to the X-rays. So what can be done about this? The fact is that many racial and ethnic minorities and poor people have to live, work and play ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 5 of 12 Environmental Justice in environments that cause them to be sick. Because they do not have the ability to move to other areas or change jobs, they often remain exposed to harmful materials for long periods of time, and suffer from a variety of illnesses. This isn't fair, is it? I'm sure you agree that everyone should feel safe where they live, play, go to school, and work! Since something obviously needed to be done, as early as the 1970's an Environmental Justice movement was begun. Many community organizers and many people who were sick due to unhealthy environments, led efforts to bring attention to the fact that some people were sharing an unequal portion of illness because of where they lived, worked and played. But even with those efforts, little could be accomplished since there were no existing laws that addressed Environmental Justice issues. In 1994, in response to the continuing cries of protesters and demonstrators, President Clinton signed an Executive Order that directed the federal government to address the environmental health threats caused by people having to live, play and work in unhealthy environments. There is a federal agency called the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, that is dedicated to doing much of the research to identify environmental agents that cause illnesses and death. The information developed by NIEHS laboratories and NIEHS-supported research laboratories around the country is then used by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to develop laws that will help promote healthy environments. Many people think that NIEHS and EPA are the same organization, but they are not. Both are involved with the "environment", but they have very different missions-in general, it is the responsibility of the EPA to make and enforce laws that promote healthy environments. To do this properly, NIEHS and other similar research organizations must first identify appropriate environmental concerns. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 6 of 12 Radon Problems Radon Problems This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Radon is an invisible and odorless gas. It comes from the soil, rock and water under homes and other buildings. It moves up through the ground to the air above and into a home through cracks and other holes in buildings. Radon can be found all over the U.S. Radon gas decays into radioactive particles that can get trapped in the lungs. This can damage the lungs. Breathing radon gas for a long time can cause lung cancer. Most homes don't have a radon problem, but there is a simple test to find out if there is a high radon levels in a home. The good thing is that homes with high levels of radon can easily be fixed. All homes with basements should be tested for radon. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 7 of 12 Lead Poisoning Lead Poisoning This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. What is Lead, and why should I care? Lead is a heavy metal and basic chemical element. Lead is also a poison. It can slow mental and physical growth and make you very sick. For these reasons, you should know where lead might show up in your environment so you can avoid contact with it! Sources of Lead Poisoning á HOUSE PAINTS: Before 1950, lead-based paint was used on the inside and outside of most homes. It was used to make several colors including white, and was known to dry to a hard, durable surface. In 1977, federal regulations banned lead from paint for general use. But homes built before 1977 are likely to contain lead-based paint. á SOIL: Soil (dirt) near heavily-used streets and roads may contain lead because lead used to be used in gasoline. Lead may also be found in the soil next to homes that previously had been painted with lead-based paint. Lead in the soil can contribute to high levels of lead in household dust. á DRINKING WATER: Lead may get into drinking water when materials used in plumbing materials, such as pipes, lead-based solders, brass and chrome plated faucets, begin to corrode (break down). á OTHERS: Lead has recently been found in some plastic mini-blinds and vertical blinds which were made in other countries. In addition, lead may be present in old toys, some imported toys, lead-glazed or lead-painted pottery, leaded crystal, and some inks, plasters, hobby and sports materials (such as artists' paints, ammunition, stained glass treatments, or lead sinkers used in fishing). Lead in paint was greatly reduced in the 1950's. And later, in 1978, the addition of lead to paints was eliminated. Today, paints and gasolines with lead in them are no longer sold (with the exception that lead is still included in some artist's paints). But even though paint sold today is safe, there are still pre-1950 buildings with old lead paint around in our communities. The old paint flakes off, and the lead dust ends up on babies' hands and toys. And you know ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 8 of 12 Lead Poisoning where babies put their hands and their toys! Even minor exposures to lead can cause nervous system disorders, lowered IQ's, impaired memory and reaction times, and shortened attention spans. So it is very important to clean up areas where lead paint was once used and dust frequently to avoid the lead particles that accumulate in household dust. Lead poisoning is a serious problem! Childhood lead poisoning is still one of the most important health issues in the United States today. According to recent CDC estimates, 890,000 U.S. children age 1-5 have elevated blood lead levels, and more than one-fifth of African-American children living in housing built before 1946 have elevated blood lead levels. These figures reflect the major sources of lead exposure: deteriorated paint in older housing, and dust and soil that are contaminated with lead from old paint and from past emissions of leaded gasoline. And to complicate things, lead poisoning can be so subtle that the affected child may not show any clear physical signs. Therefore, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now recommends screening children in high risk areas or populations for lead exposures. Symptoms of Lead Poisoning á headaches á muscle and joint weakness or pain á excessive tiredness or lethargy á behavioral problems or irritability á difficulty concentrating á loss of appetite á metallic taste in the mouth á abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting á constipation These symptoms may or may not be present, and of course each of them can also be caused by many other common illnesses. But in cases where some of these symptoms are present for a long time, no other cause has been found, and there may have been some exposure to lead, then tests for test poisoning should be considered. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 9 of 12 Asthma and Allergies and their Environmental Triggers Asthma and Allergies and their Environmental Triggers This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Asthma and allergy attacks have increased in the United States despite the fact that our outdoor air quality has improved. Some researchers think these problems have increased because kids are spending too much time indoors. When outdoors, we are exposed to pollens and dust, and other irritants. But when indoors, we are also exposed to "allergens." Allergens are proteins that originate from cockroaches, mold, pets, and dust mites (tiny bug-like creatures that live in dust). Allergens cause allergies.....and most people know that allergies can make you sniffle, sneeze, have runny and itchy eyes, and other cold-like symptoms. But allergens can also trigger asthma attacks, which are more serious. Asthma symptoms include wheezing (a high-pitched whistling sound heard when exhaling); coughing spells unrelated to a cold; shortness of breath, especially during exercise; and tightness in the chest. Allergic asthma affects about 3 million children (8 to 12 percent of all children) and 7 million adults in the United States each year! What Can You Do? Reduce the allergens from YOUR environment! Most children with asthma are allergic to something, and so staying away from the "allergen" should help control the asthma. If you have asthma or allergies, stay away from animals, remove the teddy bears, rugs, curtains and lamp shades in rooms that you stay in a lot, like the bedroom. Plastic mattress and pillow covers, exterminators for pesky bugs, and the elimination of dust-traps like curtains and rugs in your bedroom may help you breathe easier. Or if it's trees and pollen that get to you, air conditioning and air filters should help. And Research Helps Too! Children whose parents or brothers and sisters have asthma are more likely to develop it themselves. But even though our "genes" do play some part in whether or not we'll have asthma, researchers hope to make the most progress in fighting the disease by looking at the ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 10 of 12 Asthma and Allergies and their Environmental Triggers environmental aspect of asthma. The hope is that if kids encounter fewer allergens early in life, they'll be less likely to develop allergic responses. Asthma research is performed at the NIEHS and at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. NIEHS and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease are also working together on an effort to help asthma sufferers. The project is called TEAM, which stands for Targeting the Environment and Asthma Management. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 11 of 12 What Are Electric and Magnetic Fields? What Are Electric and Magnetic Fields? This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Electricity is an essential part of our lives. Electricity powers all sorts of things around us, from computers to refrigerators. Use of electric power is something we take for granted. What are electric and magnetic fields? Electric and magnetic fields (EMF) are invisible lines of force that surround any electrical device. Power lines, electrical wiring, and electrical equipment all produce EMF. Some people wonder whether EMF might have some bad effects our health. We are exposed to EMF almost everywhere we go, at home, at school, in stores, and even outside when we are near all types of electrical equipment, wiring, and power lines. EMF decreases rapidly as you get farther away from the source. Alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC)? In the United States, if something is plugged into a household wall socket, it is using AC. AC reverses direction in the electrical wiring-or alternates-60 times per second, or at 60 hertz (Hz). If something uses batteries, the electric current flows in one direction only, and it is using DC. What happens when I am exposed to EMF? In most practical situations, DC electric power does not induce electric currents in humans. AC electric power produces electric and magnetic fields that create weak electric currents in humans. Being exposed to some kinds of EMF may have some bad effects on humans, but scientists do not know for sure. Because of this, NIEHS recommends that people learn practical ways of reducing exposures to EMFs. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 12 of 12