Bees are flying insects that feed on nectar and pollen. They are usually yellow and black and covered in fuzzy hair that makes collecting pollen easier. A bee's body is similar to that of other insects-for instance, an ant-with three major sections: the head, the middle section called the thorax, and the last section called the abdomen. The head of a bee has five eyes for seeing and two antennae for touching and smelling. Two sets of wings and three sets of legs can be found on a bee's thorax. Depending on the type of bee, the last set of legs might have little sacs that store the pollen that the bee has collected from flowers. Many types of bees have stingers. The bee stinger is the most feared part of a bee, and for good reason. Filled with poison, the stinger is a bee's protection from danger. The stingers are around 12 millimeters long. There are over 20,000 known bee species in the world. The best known is probably the honeybee. Honeybees live in beehives, which have a distinct order that helps things run smoothly. At the bottom of the totem pole are the workers. Workers are young female bees. Some of their main duties include going out to find food (nectar and pollen), building the hive, and keeping it clean. Honeybees will travel up to eight miles if necessary to find nectar and pollen to bring back to the hive. Worker bees are actually the only bees that ever do any stinging. When this does happen, it is usually because they are trying to protect their hive from harm. A bee rarely stings when it is away from the hive, but it might sting if it senses danger. The lifespan of a worker bee is anywhere from 4 to 9 months. The queen honeybee is the biggest bee in the hive. There is usually only one per hive, and her job is to grow the family by laying eggs that will become the next generation of honeybees. She lays over a thousand eggs per day and can live anywhere from 3 to 5 years. When the time comes for a new queen to take over, some larvae are placed in special chambers to grow queen bees. These larvae are fattened up with royal jelly, a nutritious substance that worker bees secrete. It usually takes about two weeks for a female larva to grow into a queen bee. The first female bee to become a queen bee kills the other potential queen bees. Male honeybees are called drones. They don't have stingers, and they don't collect nectar or pollen. Their only purpose is to mate with the queen. Several hundred drones can live in a hive at one time. As the winter months approach, the males are kicked out of the hive in order to make it easier for the queen and her workers to survive. Food needs to be saved as there are fewer flowers to collect pollen and nectar from. Less food means the drones are the first ones to go! ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Honey to the Bee - StepRead1 Honey to the Bee by ReadWorks Bees are flying insects that feed on nectar and pollen. There are over 20,000 kinds of bees in the world. Most of them are yellow and black and covered in fuzzy hair. Their hair makes collecting pollen easier. A bee's body is similar to that of other insects, such as ants. It has three main sections: the head at one end, the thorax in the middle, and then the abdomen. A bee's head has five eyes and two antennae. The eyes are for seeing, and the antennae are for touching and smelling. On a bee's thorax are two sets of wings and three sets of legs. Some bees have little sacs on their last set of legs. These sacs hold the pollen that the bee collects from flowers. Many bees also have stingers. Their stingers are about 12 millimeters long. They are full of poison and used for protection. Of all the bees in the world, the honeybee may be the best known. A honeybee lives in a beehive with a strict social order. The honeybees in the hive are organized in groups. Each group has different duties. This system helps the bees get things done. One group in this social order is the worker bees. Workers are young female bees. They live for 4 to 9 months. One of their main duties is building the hive. Then they have to keep it clean. They are also in charge of going out to find nectar and pollen for all the bees in the hive to eat. Workers will go as far as eight miles to find food for the hive. Workers are the only bees that ever do any stinging. When they do, they are usually close to the hive and trying to protect it from harm. They might also sting away from the hive if they sense danger. Another type of bee in the hive is the queen. There is usually only one queen in a hive, and she is the biggest bee in it. Her job is to make her bee family bigger by laying eggs. She lays more than a thousand eggs every day. From these eggs will come the next generation of honeybees. The new honeybees will become members of the hive after they hatch. The queen bee lives for 3 to 5 years. When the time comes for a new queen to take over, some young female bees are put in special parts of the hive. They are fed royal jelly. Royal jelly is a healthy food that worker bees produce. It usually takes about two weeks for one of the young bees to grow into a queen. The first one to become a queen then kills the others. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Honey to the Bee - StepRead1 Male honeybees are called drones. All they do is mate with the queen. They don't even have stingers! Hundreds of drones can live in a hive at once. Even so, they are forced to leave before winter. They are kicked out of the hive so that food can be saved. In the winter there are fewer flowers for bees to collect pollen and nectar from. Less food means the drones have to go! Their absence makes it easier for the queen and her workers to survive. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Honey to the Bee - StepRead2 Honey to the Bee by ReadWorks Bees are flying insects that feed on nectar and pollen. There are over 20,000 kinds of bees. Most of them are yellow and black. Most of them also have fuzzy hair on their bodies. This hair makes gathering pollen easier. A bee's body is a lot like the bodies of other insects. It has three main sections. One is the head. A bee has five eyes on its head. It uses all of these eyes to see. It also has two antennae on its head. It uses them to touch and smell. In the middle of a bee's body is the thorax. On this section there are two sets of wings and three sets of legs. Some bees have little sacs on their last set of legs. The sacs hold the pollen that the bee gathers from flowers. The last section of a bee's body is the abdomen. A lot of bees have stingers. The stingers are about 12 millimeters long. They are full of poison and used for protection. One kind of bee is the honeybee. Honeybees live in beehives. The honeybees in a hive are organized in groups. Each group has different duties. All this organization helps the bees get things done. One group in a hive of honeybees is the workers. Workers are young female bees. They live for 4 to 9 months. One of their duties is building the hive. Then they have to keep it clean. They are also in charge of getting food for all the bees in the hive. To do this, they go out and find nectar and pollen. They may go as far as eight miles. Workers are the only bees that sting. They are usually close to the hive when they do so. They sting to protect the hive. Workers away from the hive may also sting if they sense danger. The biggest bee in a hive is the queen. There is usually only one queen in a hive. Her job is to lay eggs. She lays more than a thousand eggs every day. New bees will come out of these eggs. They are the next generation of honeybees. The queen lives for 3 to 5 years. After that a new queen must take over. When this time comes, some young female bees are put in special parts of the hive. They are fed royal jelly. This jelly is a healthy food that worker bees produce. It usually takes about two weeks for one of the young bees to grow into a queen. The first one to become a queen then kills the others. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Honey to the Bee - StepRead2 Male honeybees are called drones. All drones do is mate with the queen. They don't even have stingers! Hundreds of drones can live in a hive at once. The other bees make them leave before winter, though. The drones are forced out of the hive so that food can be saved. In the winter there are fewer flowers for bees to collect pollen and nectar from. Less food means the drones have to go! Once they are gone, it is easier for the queen and her workers to survive. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved.