Article-A-Day Invertebrates 5 Articles Check articles you have read: SummerReads: Moths - Is it a Moth or a Butterfly? 224 words SummerReads: Moths - Silkworms 241 words Honey to the Bee 516 words SummerReads: Moths - Caterpillars 236 words A Little about Ants 327 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 6 SummerReads: Moths - Is it a Moth or a Butterfly? SummerReads: Moths - Is it a Moth or a Butterfly? by Alice Lee Folkins This text is provided courtesy of Elfrieda H. Hiebert and TextProject. Sometimes people have a hard time telling moths and butterflies apart. They both have four wings, a body, and two feelers on their heads. They both start out as eggs from which they hatch as caterpillars. Caterpillars of both types build cocoons from which they leave as adults. But butterflies and moths are different from each other in important ways. Butterflies are usually out during the day. Their bright colors like yellow and red help them blend in with flowers in the sunshine. Moths are usually out at night or at dusk and dawn. Colors like gray and brown make it possible for moths to fly about in dim light without being noticed. Moths and butterflies also have different body shapes. Butterflies usually have smooth thin bodies. The bodies of most moths are fatter and covered with hair. When butterflies rest, they usually hold their wings straight up over their backs. Most moths rest with their wings spread out to their sides. Perhaps the best way to tell the two kinds of insects apart is to look closely at their feelers. Most butterflies have thin feelers, each of which has a knob at the end. The feelers of most moths are more like a comb and do not have a knob at the end. ReadWorks.org © 2010 Elfrieda H. Hiebert. Some rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 2 of 6 SummerReads: Moths - Silkworms SummerReads: Moths - Silkworms by Alice Lee Folkins This text is provided courtesy of Elfrieda H. Hiebert and TextProject. Silkworms are the caterpillars of the silk moth. The eggs of the silk moth are tiny and the caterpillars that come out when the eggs hatch are tiny. But these silkworms do not stay tiny for very long. They eat and grow until the caterpillar is about the length of your longest finger. At this point, the caterpillars build cocoons. Over two to three days, the caterpillar spins about one mile of thread until it is completely covered in its cocoon. This cocoon is special since it is made from a single long thread that is very strong. The thread of the cocoon is used to make silk for things like clothes and rugs. Other moth caterpillars also make silk threads. But the silkworm makes the longest and best silk thread. Even so, it takes a lot of silk thread to make something people can use or wear. For example, it takes about 150 cocoons to make just one silk tie that a man might wear. Silkworms were once found in the wild of Asia. But for thousands of years, silkworms have been kept in farms that are mostly in Asia. At these farms, silkworms are kept on trays covered with special paper. You won't see any silkworms outside this summer. But you will probably see another kind of animal that also makes silky threads-spiders! ReadWorks.org © 2010 Elfrieda H. Hiebert. Some rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 3 of 6 Honey to the Bee Honey to the Bee by ReadWorks Bees are flying insects that feed on nectar and pollen. They are usually yellow and black and covered in fuzzy hair that makes collecting pollen easier. A bee's body is similar to that of other insects-for instance, an ant-with three major sections: the head, the middle section called the thorax, and the last section called the abdomen. The head of a bee has five eyes for seeing and two antennae for touching and smelling. Two sets of wings and three sets of legs can be found on a bee's thorax. Depending on the type of bee, the last set of legs might have little sacs that store the pollen that the bee has collected from flowers. Many types of bees have stingers. The bee stinger is the most feared part of a bee, and for good reason. Filled with poison, the stinger is a bee's protection from danger. The stingers are around 12 millimeters long. There are over 20,000 known bee species in the world. The best known is probably the honeybee. Honeybees live in beehives, which have a distinct order that helps things run smoothly. At the bottom of the totem pole are the workers. Workers are young female bees. Some of their main duties include going out to find food (nectar and pollen), building the hive, and keeping it clean. Honeybees will travel up to eight miles if necessary to find nectar and pollen to bring back to the hive. Worker bees are actually the only bees that ever do any stinging. When this does happen, it is usually because they are trying to protect their hive from harm. A bee rarely stings when it is away from the hive, but it might sting if it senses danger. The lifespan of a worker bee is anywhere from 4 to 9 months. The queen honeybee is the biggest bee in the hive. There is usually only one per hive, and her job is to grow the family by laying eggs that will become the next generation of honeybees. She lays over a thousand eggs per day and can live anywhere from 3 to 5 years. When the time comes for a new queen to take over, some larvae are placed in special chambers to grow queen bees. These larvae are fattened up with royal jelly, a nutritious substance that worker bees secrete. It usually takes about two weeks for a female larva to grow into a queen bee. The first female bee to become a queen bee kills the other potential queen bees. Male honeybees are called drones. They don't have stingers, and they don't collect nectar or pollen. Their only purpose is to mate with the queen. Several hundred drones can live in a hive at one time. As the winter months approach, the males are kicked out of the hive in order to make it easier for the queen and her workers to survive. Food needs to be saved as there are fewer flowers to collect pollen and nectar from. Less food means the drones are the first ones to go! ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 4 of 6 SummerReads: Moths - Caterpillars SummerReads: Moths - Caterpillars by Alice Lee Folkins This text is provided courtesy of Elfrieda H. Hiebert and TextProject. Adult moths and butterflies lay many tiny eggs. The eggs are usually placed on the bottoms of leaves. When an egg hatches, out comes a caterpillar. Some caterpillars are long and thin like worms. Other caterpillars are short and fat like slugs. But not all caterpillars look like worms or slugs. One kind of caterpillar looks like a big spider. Whatever their shape or size, moth caterpillars grow up to be moths and butterfly caterpillars turn into butterflies. Caterpillars can be a tasty treat for birds and other animals. But caterpillars have ways to help them stay alive. Many caterpillars are the same color as the plants they eat. That makes it hard for other animals to see them. Caterpillars can also hide under leaves. Some caterpillars stay safe by looking like things, such as big spiders, that other animals do not like to eat. That's the reason why one kind of caterpillar looks like a big spider. Other caterpillars have small hairs with very sharp tips. These hairs contain a kind of poison. Once an animal has gotten sick from this poison, it leaves hairy caterpillars alone. The caterpillars that stay alive make a special sac called a cocoon. The cocoon completely covers the caterpillar for several days or weeks. When the cocoon opens, an adult moth or butterfly comes out. ReadWorks.org © 2010 Elfrieda H. Hiebert. Some rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 5 of 6 A Little about Ants A Little about Ants by Mimi Jorling There are lots of different kinds of ants: carpenter ants, leaf-cutter ants, sweet ants, fire ants, and many more. They are different colors, too. They can be red, or brown, or black. Some are very, very small, and some are rather big. Whatever their differences, though, all ants are social creatures. They live in large groups called colonies. Some ant colonies are big and have millions of ants. There are different types of ants in the colony, and they each have different jobs. The queen lays eggs. Soldier ants protect the queen and the colony. They also gather food and attack other colonies if they need new nesting space. Worker ants take care of babies, look for food, and build ant homes (anthills or mounds). Soldier and worker ants are female. Male ants' only job is to mate with the queen in order to produce eggs, which hatch into baby ants. Ants are busy little insects. It's easy to see them moving quickly here and there. Sometimes you can see them carrying a small piece of something, or dragging part of a leaf somewhere. Sometimes you even see two ants helping each other carry the same crumb. But where are they going and what are they doing? Ants may seem to be just running around, but they are actually important parts of their ecosystem, their world under our feet. One thing ants do to help their ecosystem is to keep soil healthy. By constantly digging through the soil, they create spaces in it. Soil needs space inside it for air and water. Without air and water in soil, the tiny creatures that live in soil would not survive. Ants also help bring nutrients to soil. When they bring food particles to their nests, they add nutrients to soil because they don't eat everything they bring. Their leftovers stay in the soil and break down into nutrients for other creatures living in the soil. ReadWorks.org á © 2016 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 6 of 6