Lights Out! Lights Out! Learn what to do-and not to do-during a power outage. After a long day of school and homework, you decide to wind down by watching TV. You put some popcorn in the microwave and settle down on the couch. Mmm, you can smell the popcorn already, and the new episode of The Voice looks really interesting. Suddenly, everything stops. The popcorn stops popping. The TV turns off. You flip the switch on the wall. The lights don't work either. It's a power outage. What should you do? Many power outages don't last long. However, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), if you're trapped without electricity for a long time, you should do certain things to stay safe. (You didn't think we'd leave you in the dark, did you? ) Lights And Electricity á Use a flashlight to find your way around. Don't use candles; open flames could cause a fire. á Turn off all electric appliances. Heat And Cold á If the blackout occurs during the summer or in a hot climate, you could be in danger of fainting or heat stroke. The CDC says you should wear loose-fitting clothes and drink a lot of fluids to keep yourself cool. á In the winter or in a cold climate, you could be at risk of hypothermia (hiy-pohTHERmee-uh) when the heat goes off. Hypothermia occurs when a person's body temperature drops way below average. Wear lots of layers, and continue moving to keep yourself warm. Food And Water á If the power is out for less than two hours, eating food from the refrigerator is safe, according to the CDC. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Lights Out! á Food in the freezer will keep longer than food in the fridge does. The food in a full freezer is safe to eat for up to 48 hours after the power has gone out. á You can pack milk, eggs, meat, and other things that could spoil in a cooler with ice in the fridge during a blackout. That will help the food last longer. If you are not sure whether the food has gone bad, throw it out. á If you normally use a water purification system, it might not work during a power outage. Stay safe by using bottled water for drinking, cooking, and brushing teeth. Carbon Monoxide Carbon monoxide is an odorless, colorless gas that can come from ovens, grills, or energy generators. The gas can be deadly. During a power outage, carbon monoxide detectors might not work. á Do not use the stove. á Never use a charcoal grill inside. á Keep a window open. á If the house is too hot or too cold, try to go somewhere else for shelter. Prepare A Kit To make sure you are prepared for a power outage, prepare an emergency kit. It should include a flashlight, batteries, a portable radio, and water. 