Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions by Caitlyn Meagher Have you felt the shaking of an earthquake? Maybe you've seen a volcanic eruption on T.V. These are both natural disasters. Natural disasters impact people and the environment. They are often unpredictable. Still, scientists, governments, and individuals create systems to help people prepare for and recover from natural disasters. Earthquakes When a large earthquake hits, the ground starts shaking. These vibrations are caused by releases of pressure in the Earth's crust. Some earthquakes are so small that people do not feel them. Some are noticeable, but not severe. Others are so large that they take lives and cause major damage. Strong earthquakes can cause buildings to collapse, resulting in deaths or injuries. This also leaves many people without shelter. For example, a large earthquake in Haiti in 2010 killed over 200,000 people. It also left 1.5 million people without homes. Earthquakes also often cause electrical lines to fall. This can lead to power outages and fires. Additionally, earthquakes may damage structures that hold toxic materials. These materials can spill into important water sources, contaminating drinking water. Earthquake aftershocks can also cause landslides and tsunamis. Because of these serious effects, it is important for people to act quickly after an earthquake. Immediately after a large earthquake, people leave risky areas. Rescue workers search through collapsed buildings to save people. Governments work to provide people with temporary housing, food, medicine, and safe drinking water. The long-term response to earthquakes focuses on rebuilding the community and preventing future damage. Some organizations raise money to support earthquake victims. This money helps rebuild hospitals, roads, and homes. Earthquake-proof buildings are also built. These buildings are made with materials like wood and steel. These materials bend rather than break during earthquakes. Even with these efforts, it may take many years for a community to fully recover from a large earthquake. Landslides ReadWorks.org á © 2023 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions Landslides are also dangerous natural disasters. During a landslide, a large amount of soil or rock moves quickly down a slope. Heavy rains often cause landslides. Rivers may also contribute to landslides. Fast-moving rivers can wear away the soil at the bottom of steep slopes. Eventually, the slope becomes too steep to hold itself up. Earthquakes or volcanic eruptions can also cause landslides. These natural disasters can destabilize rocks and dirt on a slope. Human activity can also help cause the erosion that leads to landslides. To build homes and buildings, humans often remove deep-rooted plants. These plants help keep soil and dirt in its place. When they're gone, the soil and dirt is more likely to be worn away. For example, in 2022, Petropolis, Brazil experienced major landslides. One cause of these landslides was people building houses close together on mountainsides in high-risk areas. The landslides in Brazil killed more than 120 people and swept away cars and houses. In general, landslides can cause damage to roads, cars, people, and structures in their way. Similarly to earthquakes, landslides knock down power lines and can cause buildings to collapse. The eroded area around a landslide also becomes more likely to have flash flooding and future landslides. After a landslide happens, it is important for people to leave the area. Experts check to see if the land is safe enough to start rebuilding. They also check building foundations for damage. Precautions may also be put in place after a landslide. For example, people may be relocated away from areas with a history of landslides. People or organizations may reintroduce plants to the land to help protect against future erosion. Governments can also pass laws to manage vulnerable areas. For example, Japan's "Landslide Prevention Law" helps reduce the damage caused by landslides. This law supports creating technology to help prevent landslides. For instance, building steel walls at the site of a slope can help prevent landslides. Volcanic Eruptions When a volcano erupts, it releases hot, dangerous lava, gases, and ash. Sometimes, lava flows out slowly. Other times, pressure builds inside the volcano. This pressure causes the gases and lava to escape violently. Lava, ash, and large rocks can be thrown into the air! Eruptions can bury entire towns in ash or lava. They often come with little warning. Much like earthquakes and landslides, volcanic eruptions can cause power outages. They can even spark wildfires. Volcanic eruptions, however, do not happen as often as earthquakes and landslides. ReadWorks.org á © 2023 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions After an eruption, volcanic ash can cause big problems for people and wildlife. This ash is made of tiny pieces of rock, minerals, and volcanic glass. It can travel thousands of miles from an eruption site. When mixed with rain, ash becomes heavy. This mixture of water and ash may cause roofs to fall under the weight. Additionally, toxic gases may collect in volcanic ash. If this mixture of particles is inhaled by animals and humans, it can lead to illness. People may develop health problems like asthma and lung disease. When a volcanic eruption happens, people leave the area. They may wear masks to avoid breathing in ash and toxic gases. Communities also have to begin cleaning up ash. After the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington state, volunteers and workers helped dispose of ash in landfills. This process took many days. The effort cost over 5 million dollars! Hundreds of millions of people live within range of a possible volcanic eruption. Scientists study the history of volcanic eruptions to help people prepare for this natural disaster. They also test and monitor the area around volcanoes to learn more about them. By studying these patterns, scientists can help predict future eruptions. ReadWorks.org á © 2023 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions - StepRead1 Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions by Caitlyn Meagher (Adapted by ReadWorks) Have you felt an earthquake? Maybe you've seen a volcanic eruption on T.V. These are both natural disasters. Natural disasters impact people and the environment. They are often hard to predict. Even though disasters are hard to predict, scientists and governments try to help people prepare for natural disasters. They also help people rebuild after natural disasters happen. Earthquakes When the Earth's crust releases pressure, it can make the ground shake. This is an earthquake. Some earthquakes are so small that people do not feel them. Some earthquakes are strong enough to feel, but are not dangerous. Other earthquakes are very strong and dangerous. They can hurt people and cause damage. Strong earthquakes can cause buildings to fall. This can leave people without homes. It can also hurt or kill people inside buildings. For example, a large earthquake in Haiti in 2010 killed over 200,000 people. It left 1.5 million people without homes. Earthquakes also often cause power lines to fall. This can lead to power outages and fires. Additionally, earthquakes may damage buildings that hold toxic materials. These materials can spill into water sources. This can make drinking water unsafe. Finally, earthquake aftershocks can cause other disasters like landslides and tsunamis. Because of these serious effects, people need to act quickly after an earthquake. Immediately after a large earthquake, people leave dangerous areas. Rescue workers search through fallen buildings to save people. Governments try to give people housing, food, medicine, and safe drinking water. After an earthquake, people try to rebuild the community and prevent future damage. Some organizations raise money to support people hurt by earthquakes. This money helps rebuild hospitals, roads, and homes. Special buildings are also built. These buildings are made with materials like wood and steel. These materials bend rather than break during earthquakes. They are safer for people during earthquakes. It may take years for a community to recover from a large earthquake. ReadWorks.org á © 2023 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions - StepRead1 Landslides Landslides are also dangerous natural disasters. During a landslide, a large amount of soil or rock moves quickly down a hill or slope. Landslides can start in different ways. Heavy rains often cause landslides. Rivers may also cause landslides. Fast-moving rivers can remove the soil at the bottom of steep slopes. This can make the top of the slope collapse. Earthquakes or volcanic eruptions can also cause landslides. These natural disasters can make the rocks and dirt on a slope looser. People's actions can also make landslides more likely to happen. To build homes and buildings, humans often remove plants with deep roots. These plants help keep soil and dirt in its place. When they're gone, the soil and dirt is looser. It's more likely to be worn away. For example, in 2022, there were major landslides in Petropolis, Brazil. One cause of these landslides was people building houses close together on steep mountainsides. These landslides killed more than 120 people.The dirt and rocks swept away cars and houses. In general, landslides can cause damage to roads, cars, people, and buildings. Like earthquakes, landslides can knock down power lines and buildings. Landslides can also cause future problems in an area. When landslides happen, they wear away the soil on a slope. This makes the area more likely to have flooding and landslides. Right after a landslide, it is important for people to leave the area. Experts check to see if the land is safe to start rebuilding. They check buildings to see if they're safe. Later, people start thinking about how to protect that area in the future. For example, people may be moved away from areas where many landslides have happened. People or organizations may plant more plants with deep roots to help protect against landslides. Governments can also pass laws to help prevent landslides. For example, Japan's "Landslide Prevention Law" helps lower the amount of damage caused by landslides. This law helps people use technology to prevent landslides. For example, people can build steel walls in a slope to prevent landslides. Volcanic Eruptions When a volcano erupts, it releases hot, dangerous lava, gases, and ash. Sometimes, lava flows out slowly. Other times, pressure builds inside the volcano. This pressure makes gases and lava escape quickly. Lava, ash, and large rocks can be thrown into the air! Volcanic eruptions can happen suddenly, without much warning. They can bury towns in ash or lava. Like earthquakes and landslides, volcanic eruptions can damage power lines. They can ReadWorks.org á © 2023 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Responding to Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Landslides, and Volcanic Eruptions - StepRead1 cause wildfires. Volcanic eruptions, however, do not happen as often as earthquakes and landslides. After an eruption, volcanic ash can cause big problems. This ash is made of tiny pieces of rock, minerals, and volcanic glass. It can travel thousands of miles from the volcano. When mixed with rain, ash becomes heavy. This heavy ash may cause roofs to fall. Additionally, dangerous gases may collect in volcanic ash. If animals and humans breathe in these gases, they can become sick. These gases can cause health problems like asthma and lung disease. When a volcano erupts, people leave the area. They may wear masks to avoid breathing in ash and dangerous gases. Communities also have to begin cleaning up. For example, after the Mount St. Helens volcano in Washington state erupted in 1980, people helped clean up ash. Cleaning took many days. The effort cost over 5 million dollars! Hundreds of millions of people live near volcanoes. They could be in trouble if these volcanoes erupt. Scientists are trying to protect people from volcanoes. They study the history of volcanoes to help people prepare. They test and watch the area around volcanoes to learn more about them. By studying these areas, scientists can help predict future eruptions and keep people safer. 