Healthy Eating, Healthy Planet Healthy Eating, Healthy Planet by ReadWorks BEING HUMAN Humans are unlike any other animal on Earth. Our unique brains and bodies allow us to use the world's resources in ways no other animal can. No other animal can claim it's been to the bottom of the deepest ocean, to the top of the tallest mountain, and even up and out of Earth to the moon. On a simpler level, do you know of any animal that can build a two-story, single-family brick home with an attached garage? Or just make one of the toilets in the house? While exercising our profound abilities (like making toilet bowls), we have fundamentally changed our planet and, in many ways, we've made it our planet. We've cut down entire forests to construct towns and cities. We've replaced the trees and plants with buildings, and paved over the forest floor with roads. These activities help us live, but they also create pollution that affects the air we breathe and the water we drink. EATING FOR A HEALTHIER PLANET Luckily, we can reduce the impact our activities have on the planet. One such activity is growing food. Think of all the land, equipment and work that go into a potato farm, an apple orchard or a cattle operation. By eating the right foods grown in the right way, we can limit the effects our farms and ranches have on the environment and eat our way to a healthier planet! EAT LIKE SQUIRRELS A great way to limit your impact on the planet is to follow other animals' way of eating. Squirrels, for instance, eat nuts found close to their tree house. Elephants eat the trees and bushes that grow around them. Killer whales eat the fish swimming with (and away!) from them. What these animals are doing is eating in-season and locally. We can do the same. EAT IN-SEASON Most of our favorite fruits and vegetables don't grow year-round and have their own natural season. Modern farming techniques have changed that, and we can have almost anything any time of the year. But when this produce is grown during its natural off-season, it may not taste the same. If we eat with our foods' natural seasons, we are eating in sync with nature. EAT LOCALLY Eating locally means consuming produce that is grown close to your home. It will definitely limit your choices, but it will ultimately lower the impact you and your eating habits have on the environment. An easy way to get local produce is to shop at a nearby farmer's market. ReadWorks.org á © 2013 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Healthy Eating, Healthy Planet Love to eat grapes? Well, you can eat them in-season and locally...if you moved around the world a lot to follow the seasons! Grapes are a summer fruit so during the winter, many northern American supermarkets buy them from farmers in Chile, which is more than 4,000 miles away! GROW YOUR OWN One of the best things you can do to be a lower-impact animal is grow your own food. It may seem like a lot of work but people and communities all over the country grow some or all of their own food. There are many benefits to growing your own food. One benefit is just learning about where your food comes from. Most produce found in your grocery store has stickers or signs that tell you where it was grown. Let's say you pick up a tomato and learn the tomato was grown hundreds of miles away before getting into your hand. If you grew a tomato in your backyard, school or local community garden, not only would you save a trip to the grocery store, you would save that tomato a long trip, and the planet a lot of resources. Another benefit of growing your own food is that your food is fresher. It can take weeks for produce to get from the farm to your supermarket. By growing your own food, those weeks become just days, hours or even seconds. Now that's fresh! COMMUNITY When you buy food that is grown locally, you're also supporting your own community. The money you spend goes toward your neighbors' jobs and businesses and keeps your community strong and unique. HEALTHY EATING, HEALTHY PLANET Although human activities alter the planet, there are many things we can do to limit our impact. The impact of growing and raising our food on the planet is high but by eating locally, in-season, and even growing our own food, we can make the planet a better place while eating great food! 