Studying Coral Reefs Helps the Land, Too Studying Coral Reefs Helps the Land, Too Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. Have you ever seen the ocean? Standing on a beach watching waves rise and crash onto the sand is an amazing sight. But the real action is happening underwater. Scientists who study the life in the ocean are called marine biologists. Marine biologists also study major changes in the ocean and how those changes affect ocean life. For instance, climate change is making oceans warmer. It is also changing the water in other ways. One big concern is its damaging effects on coral reefs. Some marine biologists work as coral reef conservationists to find ways to reverse these effects. Coral reefs are underwater structures in the ocean near the coasts. They are made up of tiny ocean animals called corals. The corals grow side by side in groups, so that all together they look like plants or piles of rocks. Corals and tiny organisms called algae have a symbiotic relationship. This means they need each other to live. Corals provide a safe home for the algae, and algae help corals get enough food. Algae also give corals their bright colors. Coral reefs are located near many countries all over the world. These reefs are very important to ocean life and to the coastal communities. Thousands of ocean animals depend on coral reefs for shelter and food. Coral reefs also protect the land. They absorb some of the energy from big storms that threaten the coasts. By the time the big storms reach land, they are not as strong. This helps prevent flooding. Climate change and pollution are hurting coral reefs. When the water gets too dirty or too warm, corals lose their algae and turn white. This is called coral bleaching. Coral bleaching is happening all over the world. When corals bleach, they often die. When the corals die, it hurts all those other animals that depend on them for their homes and food. Coral bleaching also puts the communities along the coast at greater risk of being damaged by storms. Coral reef conservationists and other scientists are working to find ways to help corals survive. To do this, they are trying to understand why some corals bleach and others don't. They are also studying ways to help make coral reefs bigger and stronger. They are growing coral in laboratories. Then they transplant them near reefs to find out if they'll grow in that area. Amy Baco-Taylor is a marine biologist who is studying corals. She first learned about marine biology from reading stories and watching videos about the ocean. She saw the ocean in ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Studying Coral Reefs Helps the Land, Too person for the first time when she was 13. Now, she goes on expeditions to study deep-sea corals. She is helping to better understand rare corals and the best way to help them survive in a changing ocean. Curt Storlazzi is a scientist with the United States Geological Survey. He studies other ways to help coral. He calls healthy coral reefs a natural infrastructure, or foundation. On land, infrastructure refers to roads, bridges, and buildings, plus water and electricity. Coral reefs are like the infrastructure of the ocean. If spending time underwater learning about marine life sounds amazing to you, think about becoming a coral reef conservationist. Helping to save these important animals will help the ocean and the land. ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 