Article-A-Day Physical Science 7 Articles Check articles you have read: Light the Way 116 words Everyday Einstein: Lasers 181 words Train of Thought: Light Speed 464 words Einstein in Time 161 words Train of Thought: Newton's Ball 408 words Equation Invasion 248 words It's All Relative 195 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Articles generously provided by American Museum of Natural History are included. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Page 1 of 8 Light the Way Light the Way by American Museum of Natural History This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. What's the fastest thing in the universe? If you said light, you're right! It takes us about 6 hours to fly from New York to California. Light can go there - and back - in 1/30 of a second! It is a special kind of energy, called electromagnetic radiation, and it travels in waves. Visible light waves come in different sizes: short ones look blue and long ones look red. All other electromagnetic radiation is invisible to our eyes - like the very long waves that can carry signals to radios. Whatever the size, you won't find anything that goes faster than light. Why not? That's a light mystery that's kept scientists in the dark - so far. ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 2 of 8 Everyday Einstein: Lasers Everyday Einstein: Lasers This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. Einstein's work helped in the making of many things! Here's how his ideas led to lasers: Before Einstein Scientists pondered the nature of matter and energy and how they interacted. They knew that energy comes out of matter as light, but how was a mystery... During Einstein's Life By imagining electrons being forced into unstable orbits in an atom, Einstein figured out how energy could be released by atoms. By making this discovery, he helped pave the way for the invention of lasers. After Einstein Scientists can now make the electrons in atoms all emit the same kind of energy in the same direction in a narrow beam. What Lasers Mean to You Did you know the word LASER stands for "Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation"? Lasers are used in all sorts of things today, including supermarket checkout scanners, medical equipment, and CD players. A tiny laser is used to read the bumps and grooves on a CD and translate the pattern into sound. ReadWorks.org © 2015 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 3 of 8 Train of Thought: Light Speed Train of Thought: Light Speed This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. Light is fast! It's the only thing that can reach the universal speed limit - 186,000 miles per second. (If you could travel as fast as light, the universe would look very different.) Because it moves so quickly, light can seem to appear instantaneously. Think about when you turn on a TV... images pop up right away. How does the speed of light affect our lives and what we know about the universe? To shed some light on the subject, power up this thought experiment: Question: What if light could only travel 1 foot/second? Example: Imagine you are watching a live concert broadcast on TV. Logic: When light travels at its normal speed of 186,000 miles/second, you see the broadcast immediately. You could be 1 mile or 3,000 miles away from the concert - it doesn't matter! Why? Light can travel distances very rapidly. If you changed how fast light could travel, then you would change the amount of time it would take for it to reach your eyes. Prediction: If light could only travel 1 foot/second, the broadcast would reach viewers at different times, depending on their distance from the concert. Somebody sitting 1 mile away would receive the broadcast with a delay of over an hour. Somebody 3,000 miles away would receive the broadcast about 6 months later. Not exactly live TV! Conclusion: The farther away you are from a source of light, the longer it takes the light to reach you. Did you know? Distances on Earth are relatively short, which is why live TV can be seen anywhere on Earth at almost exactly the same time. But distances in the universe are SO great that by the time light from an object in space, like a star, reaches our eyes, what we are seeing is a snapshot of how it looked hundreds or even millions of years ago! ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 4 of 8 Einstein in Time Einstein in Time This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. Albert Einstein has been called one of the freest people who ever lived. He didn't let anything hold back his imagination, and it powered him to completely new places. As a great humanitarian, Einstein supported causes that helped people around the globe. Take a trip through his incredible life and see for yourself! Everyday Einstein: Humanitarian Einstein is now a household word that means "genius." During his life, Einstein used his fame to draw attention to things he believed in. He spoke about peace between Jews and Arabs and about finding homes for both Jewish and political refugees. He opposed all forms of racial and ethnic discrimination, such as segregation. He was also an activist for world peace and democracy. Einstein realized that the scientific community can either help or hurt our civilization and believed that scientists are responsible for their actions. If you were a superstar celebrity, how would you use your fame to make the world a better place? ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 5 of 8 Train of Thought: Newton's Ball Train of Thought: Newton's Ball This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. Have you ever wondered how satellites in the sky stay in orbit? Before there were satellites, Newton asked himself the same thing about objects such as the moon: Why do things stay in orbit? Get your brain on the ball and explore Newton's question with the thought experiment below: Question: Can you throw a ball so hard that it never falls to Earth? Example: Imagine you are on a mountain and throw a ball in front of you. Logic: Think about what happens if you throw a ball softly. It goes a bit and then falls to the ground. If you throw the ball harder, it will go farther before it hits the ground, right? Prediction: If you throw the ball hard enough, it will never hit the ground and continue to follow a stable path around the earth. This path is called an orbit. (If something is going a certain speed around Earth, it will stay in orbit around the Earth. ) Conclusion: By combining his theory of gravity with his theory of motion, Newton came up with a formula that showed how fast an object has to go to stay in orbit. He was right! Today, scientists use his formula to put satellites in orbit. Who said science couldn't be a ball? ReadWorks.org © 2016 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 6 of 8 Equation Invasion Equation Invasion This article is provided courtesy of the American Museum of Natural History. The world's most famous equation is probably Einstein's E=mc 2 . Einstein made an astounding discovery about the relationship between energy and mass, and put it into this formula. What does it mean? E = Energy á Energy makes things happen, such as making objects move or get hotter. á Energy often changes from one form to another. It comes in many forms, such as heat and light. Equal sign = THE BIG THING! á The equal sign lets us compare and connect two things that are equivalent. For example, 1 dollar = 100 pennies. á E=mc 2 compares and connects mass and energy. á E=mc 2 explains how much energy is in any amount of matter - the more mass something has, the more energy it has. á Since c 2 is such a huge number, a little bit of mass contains a huge amount of energy. m = MASS á Mass is the amount of "stuff" an object has. á Mass isn't connected to size. á Same-sized things can have different masses. For example, a box of tissues is the same size as a brick. But they have different masses - and different results if you drop one on your foot! c 2 = SPEED OF LIGHT SQUARED á c = the speed of light = 670 million miles per hour = 670,000,000 mph. á In this equation, c is squared, which is 670 million mph x 670 million mph. That's a big, big number! á c in the equation comes from the Latin word celeritas, which means "swiftness." ReadWorks.org © 2015 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 7 of 8 It's All Relative It's All Relative This text is provided courtesy of OLogy, the American Museum of Natural History's website for kids. There is no absolute, or "same," time and space. This means time and space are different for everyone! How you experience events in time and space depends on TWO important things: 1. Where you're looking from Imagine you're sitting on a fast-moving train. You see your friend moving by you; your friend sees you moving by him or her. 2. How fast you're moving compared to the speed of light Imagine you are still on the train and two lightning bolts flash - one in front of the train, the other behind it. If your friend sees them flash at the same time, you'll see them flash at different times. Why? Because you're moving toward the light of one bolt and away from the light of the other. Time and space are different depending on your frame of reference. You've just been working on a thought experiment. Einstein and others have used thought experiments to try to explain how the universe works. To perform a thought experiment, you don't need a laboratory or machines - just your imagination! Once, when someone asked Einstein where his laboratory was, he pointed to his pen. ReadWorks.org © 2015 American Museum of Natural History. All rights reserved. Used by Permission Page 8 of 8