Article-A-Day Satellites 8 Articles Check articles you have read: GPS and the Quest for Pizza 321 words Creating Images of the Earth 352 words The Nine-Eyed MISR 817 words How Does GPS Work? 329 words Orbits 'R' Us! 674 words Getting the Right Angle on the Story: Tsunami Imaging 637 words Where Do Old Satellites Go When They Die? 413 words Bad (Space) Weather Cancels Pigeon Races! 503 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 9 GPS and the Quest for Pizza GPS and the Quest for Pizza The text and image are from NASA Space Place. It's Friday night and you want some pizza. Fast. But somebody is going to have to pick that pizza up, and that means they need to know how to get to the closest pizzeria. In this modern world that is no problem! Just plug 'pizza' into a smartphone and it tells you exactly how to get there. But how exactly does the phone know where you are? Something called a Global Positioning System, or GPS, tells you, that's how. When your phone tells you where you are, it may actually be listening to signals from satellites high up in space. There are over 30 satellites used for GPS, orbiting over 16,000 miles (26,000km) above the Earth! Your phone just needs to figure out how far away you are from some of them. If your phone knows how far away it is from four satellites, then there is only one place on Earth you can be! Your phone, or any device with a GPS, is programmed to know where all the satellites are at any given time. The phone uses that information-along with the amount of time the signal took to reach it-to figure out how far away the satellites are. By doing that, it computes its location. So when you search for the nearest pizza place in your smartphone, this is what your phone is thinking: "What satellites are talking to me right now? Hey there, satellites! I know you guys! And I know where you are in the sky right now, too! Let me listen to your signal to figure out how far away I am from each of you... Oh! I must be right here! There's no other place that is the right distance away from each of you! OK, let me check the internet to see what pizza places are near me..." And all that happens in an instant. Good thing, too. You're only getting hungrier. ReadWorks.org Page 2 of 9 Creating Images of the Earth Creating Images of the Earth The text and images are from NASA Space Place. How would the world look from space if the trees, fields, lakes, and mountains were each different colors? You could fly over looking for an orchard of your favorite apple trees, then swoop down and pick your fill! But there are other, maybe more important reasons for being able to see such details from space. For example, people who are doing jobs like ... á Farming á Taking care of forests á Looking for places to drill for oil á Digging for valuable minerals á Building cities á Helping control floods ... can do their jobs even better if they have very accurate images of the ground. Oddly enough, the best way to see lots of ground in lots of detail is from space! Thanks to the Landsat satellites, we already have images from space of Earth's entire surface. In April 1999, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration launched the seventh Landsat. Each one gets better than the last, with more and more advanced technology for imaging and mapping our planet. To make future Earth images from space even better, a special spacecraft, called Earth Observing-1 (EO-1), was launched in October 2000. EO-1 is testing some very advanced new instruments. One, called the Hyperion, is very sensitive to tiny differences in colors. It is so sensitive that when its data are processed by computers, we can see clearly where one kind of tree ends and another begins! Besides sorting out trees, Landsat images show how the land changes over time. Cities growing, rain forests and farm lands shrinking, more or less rain falling, rivers flooding, wildfires burning, volcanos erupting-their effects show plainly in Landsat pictures of the same area taken at different times. ReadWorks.org Page 3 of 9 The Nine-Eyed MISR The Nine-Eyed MISR The text and images are from NASA Space Place. There are no easy answers up there in the sky! We need to learn a lot more in order to understand how our human activities may be causing unwanted changes on our home planet. One of the instruments is the Multi-angle Imaging SpectroRadiometer, or MISR ("Miser") for short. MISR is nine cameras in one, each pointing in a different direction. As MISR passes over an area, each camera gets a shot from its own angle. Seeing the same piece of Earth's surface or atmosphere from nine different angles tells scientists a lot more than seeing it from just one angle. Here are some examples... . Some are 3-D images that you can see if you have a pair of red/blue 3-D glasses. ReadWorks.org Page 4 of 9 How Does GPS Work? How Does GPS Work? This text is from NASA Space Place. Humans have looked to the skies to find their way since ancient times. Ancient sailors used the constellations in the night sky to figure out where they were and where they were going. Today, all we need is a simple hand-held GPS (short for Global Positioning System) receiver to figure out exactly where we are anywhere in the world. But we still need objects high in the sky to figure out where we are and how we get to other places. Instead of stars, we use satellites. Over 30 navigation satellites are zipping around high above Earth. These satellites can tell us exactly where we are. What Is GPS? GPS is a system. It's made up of three parts: satellites, ground stations, and receivers. Satellites act like the stars in constellations-we know where they are supposed to be at any given time. The ground stations use radar to make sure they are actually where we think they are. A receiver, like you might find in your phone or in your parent's car, is constantly listening for a signal from these satellites. The receiver figures out how far away they are from some of them. Once the receiver calculates its distance from four or more satellites, it knows exactly where you are. Presto! From miles up in space your location on the ground can be determined with incredible precision! They can usually determine where you are within a few yards of your actual location. More high-tech receivers, though, can figure out where you are to within a few inches! The ancient sailors of history would be flabbergasted by the speed and ease of pinpointing your location today. GPS in Everyday Life There's a whole lot of important things GPS is used for-but perhaps nothing is more important than finding the quickest slice of pizza ... . ReadWorks.org Page 5 of 9 Orbits 'R' Us! Orbits 'R' Us! This text is from NASA Space Place. When we talk about how Earth and the other planets travel around the Sun, we say they orbit the Sun. Likewise, the moon orbits Earth. Many artificial satellites also orbit Earth. Satellites can orbit Earth's equator or go over Earth's North and South Poles ... or anything in between. They orbit at a low altitude of just a few hundred miles above Earth's surface or thousands of miles out in space. The choice of orbit all depends on the satellite's job. Suspended Animation The two GOES* weather satellites, for example, have the job of keeping an eye on the weather over North America. They need to "never take their eyes off" any developing situation, such as tropical storms brewing in the Atlantic Ocean, or storm fronts moving across the Pacific Ocean toward the west coast of the U.S. Therefore, they are "parked" in what is called a geostationary (gee-oh-STAY-shun-air-ee) orbit. They orbit exactly over Earth's equator and make one orbit per day. Thus, since Earth rotates once on its axis per day, the GOES satellite seems to hover over the same spot on Earth all the time. *GOES stands for Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite. On the other hand, satellites whose job is to make maps or study all different parts of Earth's surface need an orbit that comes as close to passing over the North and South Poles as possible. This way, Earth turns under the satellite's orbit and Earth does most of the work of traveling! Also, the satellite should be close to Earth's surface (a few hundred miles up) to get a good view with its imaging and measuring instruments. The lower the satellite's orbit, the less time it takes to make one trip around Earth, and the faster it must go. That's why a geostationary orbit must be so high. It has to go out far enough so that it can travel slowly enough to go around Earth only once per day. Suppose two satellites are to be launched to the same altitude. However, one is to go into a polar orbit and one is to orbit the equator. Can you guess which satellite will take the most fuel to reach its orbit? If you guessed the polar orbiting satellite, you are right. ReadWorks.org Page 6 of 9 Getting the Right Angle on the Story: Tsunami Imaging Getting the Right Angle on the Story: Tsunami Imaging The text and images are from NASA Space Place. The people in south Asia had no warning of the next disaster rushing toward them the morning of December 26, 2004. One of the strongest earthquakes in the past 100 years had just destroyed villages on the island of Sumatra in the Indian Ocean, leaving many people injured. But the worst was yet to come -and very soon. For the earthquake had occurred beneath the ocean, thrusting the ocean floor upward nearly 60 feet. The sudden release of energy into the ocean created a tsunami (pronounced su-NAM-ee) event-a series of huge waves. The waves rushed outward from the center of the earthquake, traveling around 400 miles per hour. Anything in the path of these giant surges of water, such as islands or coastlines, would soon be under water. The people had already felt the earthquake, so why didn't they know the water was coming? Energy from earthquakes travels through the Earth very quickly, so scientists thousands of miles away knew there had been a severe earthquake in the Indian Ocean. Why didn't they know it would create a tsunami? Why didn't they warn people close to the coastlines to get to higher ground as quickly as possible? In Sumatra, near the center of the earthquake, people would not have had time to get out of the way even if they had been warned. But the tsunami took over two hours to reach the island of Sri Lanka 1000 miles away, and still it killed 30,000 people! It is important, though, to understand just how the tsunami will behave when it gets near the coastline. As the ocean floor rises near a landmass, it pushes the wave higher. But much depends on how sharply the ocean bottom changes and from which direction the wave approaches. Scientists would like to know more about how actual waves react. MISR has nine cameras all pointed at different angles. So the exact same spot is photographed from nine different angles as the satellite passes overhead. The image at the top of this page was taken with the camera that points forward at 46¡. The image caught the sunlight reflecting off the pattern of ripples as the waves bent around the southern tip of the island. These ripples are not seen in satellite images looking straight down at the surface. Scientists do not yet understand what causes this pattern of ripples. They will use computers to help them find out how the depth of the ocean floor affects the wave patterns on the surface of the ocean. Images such as this one from MISR will help. Images such as these from MISR will help scientists understand how tsunamis interact with islands and coastlines. This information will help in developing the computer programs, called models, that will help predict where, when, and how severely a tsunami will hit. That way, scientists and government officials can warn people in time to save many lives. ReadWorks.org Page 7 of 9 Where Do Old Satellites Go When They Die? Where Do Old Satellites Go When They Die? The text and images are from NASA Space Place. Like every other machine, satellites do not last forever. Whether their job is to observe weather, measure greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, or point away from Earth to study the stars, eventually all satellites grow old, wear out, and die, just like old washing machines and vacuum cleaners. So what happens when a trusty satellite's time has come? These days there are two choices, depending on how high the satellite is. For the closer satellites, engineers will use its last bit of fuel to slow it down. That way, it will fall out of orbit and burn up in the atmosphere. The second choice is to send the satellite even farther away from Earth. It can take a lot of fuel for a satellite to slow down enough to fall back into the atmosphere. That is especially true if a satellite is in a very high orbit. For many of these high satellites, it takes less fuel to blast it farther into space than to send it back to Earth. Burning Metal and "Spacecraft Cemeteries" Getting rid of the smaller satellites in low orbits is simple. The heat from the friction of the air burns up the satellite as it falls toward Earth at thousands of miles per hour. Ta-da! No more satellite. What about bigger things like space stations and larger spacecraft in low orbit? These objects might not entirely burn up before reaching the ground. There is a solution-spacecraft operators can plan for the final destination of their old satellites to make sure that any debris falls into a remote area. This place even has a nickname-the Spacecraft Cemetery! It's in the Pacific Ocean and is pretty much the farthest place from any human civilization you can find. "Graveyard Orbits" What about those higher satellites we blast farther away? Those we send into a "graveyard orbit." This is an orbit almost 200 miles farther away from Earth than the farthest active satellites. And it's a whopping 22,400 miles above Earth! So is that the end of it for these far-away satellites? As far as you and I are concerned it is! However, some of these satellites will remain in orbit for a very, very long time. Perhaps someday in the future, humans may need to send "space garbage trucks" to clean these up. But for now, at least, they will be out of the way. ReadWorks.org Page 8 of 9 Bad (Space) Weather Cancels Pigeon Races! Bad (Space) Weather Cancels Pigeon Races! The text and images are from NASA Space Place. An Ancient Sport Pigeon racing is a big sport that dates back almost 2,000 years. All over the world, there are people with the hobby of training and racing a special kind of homing pigeon. They take their caged pigeons to a spot that is a carefully measured distance from their home. Then they open the cages and time how long it takes for the pigeons to fly home. The pigeon with the shortest time gets the prize-or rather its owner gets the prize. The pigeon just gets tired, since it has flown as fast as it could for 60 - 600 miles or more (100 to 1000 kilometers)! But how do the pigeons know where home is? It has taken a lot of scientific study to figure it out, and there are still questions. One thing that seems certain is that the pigeons can detect Earth's magnetic field lines. Earth is like a big magnet, with lines of magnetic force that loop around Earth from one magnetic pole to the other. A compass needle will line up along the magnetic lines of force. That's how humans can know which way is north. The pigeons seem to have a compass too, but it is "built in," so they always know in which direction they are flying. We know they are not navigating by the position of the Sun in the sky, because they fly straight home even at night or in cloudy conditions when they can't see the Sun. While the pigeons don't use the Sun for navigation, the Sun does affect their ability to navigate. When the Sun is in a stormy mood, it blasts charged particles into space at high speeds. If the blast of particles hits Earth, it shakes up Earth's protective magnetic field. When this happens, the magnetic field that the pigeons use for navigation will change direction and the pigeon's navigation system will get confused and send the pigeon the wrong way. The anxious owner may never see his expensive champion racing pigeon again. For that reason, some pigeon racers call up the Space Weather Prediction Center (part of the National Weather Service) in Boulder, Colorado, before a big race. They want to know the "space weather" forecast. The scientists who work there keep an eye on the Sun using satellites such as the GOES (for Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites). These satellites have special instruments that monitor the Sun's x-rays and ultraviolet light output. They can detect the beginnings of a storm that might send bad space weather toward Earth. If bad space weather is on the way, the pigeon race is postponed. No one wants to lose a prized pigeon! ReadWorks.org Page 9 of 9