Saving the Flying Mammal Saving the Flying Mammal Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. You might think bats are creepy. Maybe bats have a scary reputation because they come out at night. But bats are an important animal in the ecosystem. They are pollinators, just like birds and butterflies. Pollinators spread pollen from one flower to another so plants can make fruit and seeds. That makes bats important to farmers and people who like food, which is everyone! Bats also eat bugs that people consider pests, such as mosquitos. When they fly at night to hunt for insects, they use echolocation. They send out a high-pitched sound and listen for the echo to return. The returning sound helps them locate bugs. Bats are mammals, just like humans. The bones in their wings are similar to the bones in our hands and arms! Females give birth about once a year to just one pup. There are nearly 1,400 different types of bats in the world, and about 40 species in North America. Some are named for their favorite foods, such as fruit bats. Other bats are named for their size, such as small brown bats. And some are named for their features, such as long-eared bats. In North America, bats are in trouble. Since 2006, millions of bats have died. This is bad for bats, as well as for people. It's also bad for the environment. Starting in 2006, people in New York noticed that many bats got sick and died over the winter. No one knew why. So wildlife scientists tried to find out what was making the bats sick. They found a problem in some places where bats were hibernating. Most of the bats in the northern United States and Canada hibernate during winter. That means they find a safe spot, like a cave, to keep warm and rest during the cold months when there is no food. They can slow down their breathing, so they use less energy. But in New York, researchers discovered a fungus in some of the caves where the bats were hibernating. The fungus grew on the bats' faces. This caused the bats to awaken from hibernation. As a result, the bats used more energy. They got weak and thirsty during the winter. The few bats who lived until spring didn't have the strength to find food or have babies. They died. The scientists have named the disease white-nose syndrome because that's what they see when the bats get sick. Scientists who found the fungus are now searching for ways to help bats. They are studying the bats that survived in caves where the fungus killed other bats. They want to understand how the disease spreads and how some bats stayed healthy. Other scientists are working in the bats' caves to remove the fungus. Some researchers are even trying to make a vaccine to give to bats that would prevent white-nose syndrome. People hope these efforts will help save these important flying mammals. ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 