Article-A-Day Science Basics 6 Articles Check articles you have read: Scientific Method 85 words Spelling Science the British Way 149 words Science & Scientists 265 words Experimentation 94 words Science and the Metric System 190 words Sharing Information in Science 184 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 8 Scientific Method Scientific Method This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. A good scientist learns about the world by using the scientific method. The scientific method tests a hypothesis, which is an educated guess based on what information we already have. All fields of science use the scientific method as a framework to make observations, gather data, and draw conclusions. Here is a list of the steps of the scientific method: á Gather information á Form a hypothesis á Test with an experiment á Write down results á Analyze results á State conclusions á Report results You can use the scientific method yourself! ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 2 of 8 Spelling Science the British Way Spelling Science the British Way This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Have you seen some different spelling in books or web pages from different countries? á caesium á colour á litre á oesophagus It may be wrong in the United States, but right in another country-even though it's all English! In the United States, people spell some words in the American way. In England, Scotland, and Wales, people spell it the British way. And in countries like Canada, they spell some words the British way and other words more like the American way. Confused? Check out the table below to see some of the differences. British Spelling American Spelling aluminium aluminum amoeba ameba anaemia anaemia anaesthesia anesthesia analyse analyze caesium cesium catalyse catalyze centre center colour color faeces feces ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 3 of 8 Spelling Science the British Way fibre fiber flavour flavor foetal fetal grey gray hydrolyse hydrolyze kilometre kilometer labour labor litre liter metre meter mould mold oesophagus esophagus orthopaedic orthopedic paediatric pediatric palaeontology paleontology paralyse paralyze programme program sulphur sulfur ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 4 of 8 Science & Scientists Science & Scientists This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Science is a way of organizing what we already know and learning more by experiments. Scientists use the scientific method to learn about the world. There are a lot of different branches of science. Here are a few of the more common sciences: á biology is the study of living things á zoology is the study of animals botany is the study of plants á chemistry is the study of the elements (like carbon) and their compounds (like carbon dioxide) á biochemistry - if you combine biology and chemistry, you get biochemistry - the chemistry of living things á geology is the study of rocks and the earth á astronomy is the study of stars, planets, moons, and everything in space á meteorology is the study of the weather á physics is the study of energy - light, sound, heat, electricity, and motion á anthropology is the study of humans The different kinds of scientists are named for what they study. Biologists study biology. Zoologists study animals. So there are botanists, chemists, geologists, astronomers, and many more! Science is all about getting answers to questions - á Why? á When? á Where? á What? á Who? Scientists are curious - they want to know the answers. Then they want to share what they learn. What kind of scientist do you think you might like to be? Think about what interests you - is it volcanos? Then maybe you'd like to be a vulcanologist, a special kind of geologist. Is it grasshoppers and wasps? Then entomology is for you - that's the study of insects. There's more than a whole world of science, since you might even study things far beyond our earth, and be an astronomer. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 5 of 8 Experimentation Experimentation This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. The world of science is one of constant experimentation. But what does that word, experimentation, actually mean? Experimentation is the act or process of trying out a new procedure, idea, or activity. The scientists at the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences do a lot of "experimenting" to determine how things in our environment affect our bodies. Their experiments help us determine what role environmental exposures and/or our unique genetic structures play with regard to human health. Armed with such knowledge, they may be able to discover some way to prevent that from happening. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 6 of 8 Science and the Metric System Science and the Metric System This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Scientists all over the world use the metric system. There's a very good reason for this-it's so everyone is doing the measuring the same way, all over the world. Most other countries already use the metric system for measuring everything. Another good reason to use metric is that you don't have so much to remember-no 12 inches in a foot or 5,280 feet in a mile. It's all decimal! The larger or smaller units go up or down by 10, 100, or 1,000. Meter is for length. A meter is a little longer than a yard. For long distances, there is the kilometer (a thousand meters). For small things, there is the centimeter (100 centimeters in a meter). Liter is for volume. A liter is a little larger than a quart. There are a thousand milliliters in a liter. Gram is for weight. A gram is a little more than the weight of a paper clip. For heavier things, there is the kilogram (a thousand grams). Temperatures are in degrees Celsius (also called centigrade). Water freezes at 0 degrees Celsius and boils at 100 degrees Celsius. That's easy! ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 7 of 8 Sharing Information in Science Sharing Information in Science This text is from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences site. Scientists may work alone in their laboratories for a while, but then they usually share the results of their work with others. The "sharing of information" between scientists is a form of communication that we call "collaboration." Collaboration helps scientists form a broader or more complete picture. NIEHS scientists collaborated with scientists in several other laboratories to identify the genes that may cause some forms of breast cancer and prostate cancer. In addition, scientists exchange information with other scientists in order to "corroborate" their findings. This means that they compare their research results with those of other scientists doing the same or similar work in order to validate (verify) the accuracy of their results. This would be like when you compare your answer to those of your teacher or classmates to make sure you are on the right track! Such efforts helped NIEHS discover more about some of the causes of those cancers in much less time, which means that cures for some of these cancers may also be found more quickly! Science can only advance through effective communication, collaboration, and corroboration among scientists. ReadWorks.org This article from the National Institute of Environment Health Sciences has no known copyright restrictions. Page 8 of 8