Article-A-Day Seabirds and Wading Birds 6 Articles Check articles you have read: See, Feel, Grab, Stab! 151 words Way to Go, Wading Birds! 260 words The Watery World of Wading Birds 372 words The Importance of Being Alaska 166 words A Seabird Success Story 297 words Seabirds: Feathered Ocean Travelers 275 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Articles generously provided by National Audubon Society are included. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Page 1 of 7 See, Feel, Grab, Stab! See, Feel, Grab, Stab! This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Different wading birds have different techniques for getting food. Herons and egrets find food by sight, grabbing and sometimes stabbing fish, frogs, snakes, or other prey. Ibises use their sensitive curved bill to probe in the sand, mud, or grass until they touch prey. Then they grab it. Their diet includes crayfish, crabs, insects, worms, and snails. Wood Storks have a similar hunting technique, holding their large bill partly open in the water until they feel a fish, then snapping it shut to capture the prey. Roseate Spoonbills have an unusually-shaped bill. Instead of ending in a point, it is flared and flat at the end. They find food by holding their bill slightly open in the water and sweeping it from side to side. The bill snaps shut when it comes into contact with a fish, shrimp, crab, or other prey. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 2 of 7 Way to Go, Wading Birds! Way to Go, Wading Birds! This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Wading birds have some very special hunting and feeding skills! The Reddish Egret The Reddish Egret sometimes shades the water with its wings as it wades to hunt for fish. This draws fish into the shadow and also helps the bird see better on a bright day, just as you see better when you shade your eyes with your hand. Great Blue Herons Great Blue Herons and other wading birds swallow their food whole. After catching a fish, a Great Blue Heron flips it until it can be swallowed headfirst. That way the fish's sharp fin barbs don't scratch the heron's throat or get stuck. Green Herons Green Herons stand very still or move slowly, stalking frogs and other prey. They have been observed dropping leaves, small twigs, berries, and even feathers onto the surface of the water as "bait" to lure fish. Wood Stork When a Wood Stork feels a fish with its bill, the bill automatically snaps shut. This reflex action happens in 25 milliseconds, and is considered to be one of the fastest reflex actions among vertebrates (animals with backbones). Snowy Egret When looking for food, Snowy Egrets shake and swirl their bright yellow feet in shallow water, forcing fish, crayfish, worms, and other animals they eat out into the open. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 3 of 7 The Watery World of Wading Birds The Watery World of Wading Birds This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Wading birds are a group of birds that wade in shallow water to get food. They include egrets, herons, cranes, storks, ibises, and spoonbills. If you had to describe wading birds with one word, a good choice would be long. Most of these birds' bills, necks, legs, and even their toes are long. The more you think about where these birds get their food, the more you understand why long makes sense for them. When you're a bird that wades into water to find food, having long legs really comes in handy because you can walk around without getting your feathers wet. Having a long neck and long bill means you can reach down over those long legs and grab your prey. And why is it good to have long toes if you're a wading bird? Because those toes help you keep your balance and also help you walk in mud without sinking. No matter where you live in the United States, you have a chance of seeing one of these big birds. The Great Blue Heron, for example, lives in every state except Hawaii. All wading birds need to live near water. That includes oceans and bays, marshes, rivers, lakes, and ponds. Some, like herons and egrets, can live in both fresh- and saltwater habitats. Their diet includes fish, frogs, worms, lizards, [and] insects, and some even eat small mammals and other birds. Most grab their prey with a lightning-fast strike and swallow it whole. An unusual wading bird that lives along the southern coasts of the United States is the Roseate Spoonbill. First of all, its entire body is pink, including its legs, and its eyes are reddish. Second of all, its long bill is shaped like a spoon, which-of course-is where the name comes from. Wading birds need clean water and safe places to nest and raise their young. And since people also like to be near water, it's important to know how to share [a] habitat without putting wading birds (and all wildlife) at risk. That means staying away from nesting areas and keeping the land, water, and air clean to protect the health of the birds and their food supply... . ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 4 of 7 The Importance of Being Alaska The Importance of Being Alaska This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Alaska is a gigantic peninsula. It has more than 47,000 miles of coastline where habitats from temperate rain forest to tundra meet seawaters rich with life. Alaska's fish-filled waters and plentiful coastal nesting areas host ... some 75 million seabirds. Of all the seabirds that breed in the U.S., 87% of them do so in and around Alaska. Melanie Smith understands Alaska's importance more than most. "I've been a birder my whole life," says the Audubon scientist. Melanie has seen firsthand how important Alaska's waters are to seabirds. She recently spent three weeks on an icebreaker ship off the coast of Alaska. She kept count of all the birds and marine mammals she saw during the 5,000-mile voyage. Melanie will use the collected information to map out important areas for seabirds and other wildlife. That way we can be sure to protect these important Alaskan habitats. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 5 of 7 A Seabird Success Story A Seabird Success Story This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Seabird scientist Steve Kress had a wild idea 40 years ago. He wanted Atlantic puffins to once again nest in large numbers off Maine's coast. Long ago, almost all of these colorful seabirds were hunted out. Kress's idea was based on the fact that puffins return to their birthplace colonies to breed. So in 1973, he began moving puffin chicks from Newfoundland, Canada, to a 7-acre island ... called Eastern Egg Rock off the Maine coast. That year he relocated six chicks. His team made little burrows for the chicks and fed them fish for about a month. They attached ID bands to their legs. They repeated this procedure with more chicks in the following year. By 1981, 954 chicks had been moved to Eastern Egg Rock. Each year when the youngsters paddled off to the sea, Kress wondered if he'd ever see them again. Puffins don't return home until they're ready to breed around age four or five. It was going to be a long wait. Every summer as Kress and his team raised more chicks, they also populated Eastern Egg Rock with wooden decoys to make it look like a lot of puffins were already there. One day in 1977 the first puffin arrived back! Each year after, more young puffins spent summers on Eastern Egg Rock. And finally, in 1981, Steve saw an adult puffin flying into the island with a beak-load of fish. That could mean only one thing: A chick had hatched! For the first time in more than 100 years, somewhere on the island, a puffin chick was waiting to be fed. Now, more than 100 pairs of Atlantic puffins are nesting on Eastern Egg Rock. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 6 of 7 Seabirds: Feathered Ocean Travelers Seabirds: Feathered Ocean Travelers This text is provided courtesy of the National Audubon Society. Earth is a water-covered planet and all its oceans are home to seabirds. Seabirds come in different sizes and shapes, but all seabirds are especially equipped for oceanic life. Many have wings and feet that do double duty as fins and paddles. Waterproof feathers and saltremoving noses are adaptations to spending months far from land. Some seabirds have bones that hold up to the pressure of deep-water dives and beaks that can snag the slipperiest of fish. Puffins, albatrosses, terns, petrels, and other seabirds all depend on the ocean for food. Many seabirds migrate over marathon distances, traveling thousands of miles between ocean areas rich with food and their nesting colonies on land. They navigate the world's seas, crisscrossing the borders and boundaries of nations. Seabird conservation is an international -and urgent-effort. Seabirds are the most threatened group of birds on Earth. Of the world's 346 species, 28% are threatened with extinction. Safeguarding nesting sites isn't enough. Marine areas where seabirds feed and live most of their lives need protection, too. Seabirds spend most of their lives on water, only coming on land to lay eggs and raise chicks. Seabird colonies are noisy, busy, smelly places full of life. The cliffy coasts and rocky islands off Maine and eastern Canada are a summertime destination for many seabirds. Puffins with clownish faces and beaks full of squirming fish waddle toward grass-lined burrows where chicks wait. Sleek black-headed murres sit on eggs balanced on rock ledges and cliff tops. But these birds don't stay on land. Within months most will be gone, back to their real homes -the sea. ReadWorks.org © 2017 National Audubon Society. All rights reserved. Used by Permission. Page 7 of 7