The World's First Modern Shopping Mall The World's First Modern Shopping Mall by Daniel Scheffler The country in the world with perhaps the most malls, and also some of the biggest malls, is America. Edina, Minnesota, is the site of the first modern mall. It’s still standing, and it’s called Southdale Center. This was the first mall to offer a completely enclosed retail shopping experience. Malls up to that point in time were modeled after the traditional European arcade. An arcade is a semi-covered walkway with shops on both sides. Examples of these arcades can be found today in Italy and Germany. Southdale Center was actually going to be a new version of the traditional European arcade, surrounded by apartments, schools, and facilities that provide medical and emergency services. But then the plans changed completely. The developer of the shopping center, Dayton Company, and its designer and architect, Victor Gruen, saw a much bigger opportunity. They ultimately decided that Southdale Center was going to be different; it was going to be inside a big building. It was going to be on more than one level and have a town square in the middle under a skylight. The mall opened in 1956, and it was the first fully enclosed climate-controlled retail space with multiple shops. Although the building was enclosed, there was some daylight coming through glass panels that were built into the roof. On top of that, there was electric lighting fitted throughout the mall. This was so the day would feel much longer for people in the mall. This was supposed to encourage these shoppers to stay longer and buy more things. The developing team also wanted to create a place with all the services people could possibly need all in one place. From grocery stores, to a postal office, to various department stores—they were all put under one roof. It even ended up including fishponds, trees, a cage with birds, balconies with hanging plants, and a small zoo! Southdale Center was received with a lot of excitement by the American public. On opening day of the mall, 40,000 people came to see it and shop. People came from cities close by, but also from far away, to visit a shopping mall they had never experienced before.