Article-A-Day Space Science 6 Articles Check articles you have read: A New World! 213 words Asteroid Attack! 431 words Astral Bodies 859 words All the 'Buzz' 428 words Mission: Pluto 712 words A Stargazer's Guide to Mission Control 454 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 12 A New World! A New World! Scientists discover an earthlike planet. Would you like to have a birthday party every 13 days? Then Gliese 581c is the place for you! Astronomers recently found the planet Gliese 581c. It orbits the star Gliese 581 once every 13 days. Earth orbits its star, the sun, every 365 days. Gliese 581c is an exoplanet-a planet that exists beyond our solar system. It is the most earthlike exoplanet discovered so far. Astronomers say there could be liquid water on Gliese 581c. And where there's water, there could be life. "Liquid water is critical to life as we know it," says Xavier Delfosse, one of the scientists who discovered the planet. "This planet will most probably be a very important target of the future of space missions... On the treasure map of the universe, one would be tempted to mark this planet with an X," says Delfosse. Planet Files Earth á is 8,000 miles across. á is made of rock, ice, and liquid water. á is one of eight planets in its solar system. Gliese 581c á is estimated to be 12,000 miles across. á is probably made of rock and might have ice and liquid water. á is one of three planets in its solar system. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 2 of 12 Asteroid Attack! Asteroid Attack! A few years ago, astronomers discovered a mile-wide rock tumbling through space. At first, the scientists feared that the newly discovered space rock would plow into Earth on February 1, 2019. Scientists named the space rock NT7 and clocked its speed at 7 miles per second. The scientists thought the asteroid was heading straight for Earth! Asteroid Strike! A mile-wide asteroid could take out an entire continent, scientists say. Fearing the worst, scientists kept their eyes on NT7. They plotted its orbit, or path, around the sun. After watching NT7 for several weeks, scientists found out that NT7 would miss Earth on February 1, 2019. Near-Earth Asteroids Most asteroids orbit the sun between Mars and Jupiter. NT7, however, is a near-Earth asteroid. Near-Earth asteroids orbit the sun close to Earth. NT7 orbits the sun once every 837 days. Its orbit sometimes takes NT7 as far from the sun as Mars. At other times, it is within Earth's orbit. Scientists know about nearly 350 near-Earth asteroids. They carefully map the orbits of those asteroids to make sure the asteroids don't come too close to our planet. Scientists say anywhere from 500 to 1,000 near-Earth asteroids are yet to be discovered. Scientists are searching the sky for them. They want to have plenty of warning if one comes too close. Sudden Impact ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 3 of 12 Asteroid Attack! An asteroid the size of NT7 may one day come close to Earth, scientists say. "An object of this size would be expected to hit Earth every few million years, and as we get additional data I think this threat will go away," said Donald Yeoman of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Yeoman and most other scientists say you shouldn't worry too much about asteroids. Most don't think a space rock will pose a threat in the near future. If an asteroid does come near Earth, scientists might be able to destroy it. One scientist, for instance, said a large laser could be used to zap NT7 if the asteroid came too close to Earth. What's a Comet? Many people often confuse asteroids and comets. Asteroids are chunks of rock in space. Comets are not made of rock. They are made mostly of ice. Comets spend most of their time far from the sun. When a comet nears the sun, heat from the sun warms it, causing the ice to melt. The melting ice forms a comet's long tail. After rounding the sun, the comet moves farther away from the sun. The comet cools and the tail slowly disappears. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 4 of 12 Astral Bodies Astral Bodies by Kirsten Weir The personal risks that astronauts face in space Astronauts are heroes, brave men and women who take giant leaps for humankind. No matter how great the leap, though, their bodies remain stubbornly terrestrial, adapted for life on solid ground. Mary Roach takes a look at the personal challenges of space travel in her book, Packing for Mars: The Curious Science of Life in the Void. What does it take to stay healthy and happy in the depths of space? "The answers," Roach says, "are surprising, inspiring, and often pretty gross." Space Sanitation Consider, for instance, basic hygiene. On Earth we take bathing for granted. In a cramped space capsule-not so much. The first spacecraft had no bathtubs or showers. And as astronauts ventured farther into space, the trips got longer and stinkier. NASA's Gemini VII mission in 1965 involved "two men, two weeks, no bathing, same underwear," writes Roach. By day four, the astronauts described the stench wafting from their spacesuits as "absolutely horrible." The first spacecraft had no toilets, either. Astronauts pooped in plastic bags. When bacteria break down human waste, they release gas as a by-product. To prevent gas from building up and bursting the bags, the astronauts had to massage a germicide (a solution that kills bacteria) into the waste. They found the whole process "distasteful," Roach writes. Fortunately for today's astronauts on the International Space Station, a toilet is on board. One of the biggest challenges in space is coping with weaker gravity. This is called microgravity. Gravity is a force of attraction between two objects that have mass. On Earth, the planet's massive gravity pulls you toward it. In space, tools float away and water droplets drift off, making it almost impossible to perform everyday tasks. Roach explains, "Everything you build for space has to be rethought." ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 5 of 12 Astral Bodies Roach got a taste of microgravity aboard a NASA plane nicknamed the "Vomit Comet." It's designed to fly in parabolas (U-shaped curves). On the downward path of each curve, gravity weakens, and riders free fall. At this point, riders experience weightlessness. "The sensation of weightlessness was surprising," Roach says. Your arms don't pull down on your shoulders. Your hair doesn't sit on your scalp. Your organs float up beneath your rib cage instead of hanging heavily in your gut. "It's like you're unburdened from something you didn't know was weighing you down," Roach told Current Science. "It's so comfortable, you just feel giddy. Plus just to fly across the room like Superman-it's a dream!" Falling Apart Life with weaker gravity isn't all fun and games. On Earth, working muscles counteract gravity and enable you to walk and lift objects. With weaker gravity, astronauts' muscles get no workout. They atrophy, or waste away. Space travel also weakens the skeleton. On Earth, every time you run or pick up a heavy object, your bones experience tiny amounts of damage. Cells called osteocytes sense that damage and send in cells to patch it like road crews fixing potholes. "The repaving strengthens the bones," Roach writes. In space, astronauts don't experience that minute damage. Their bones aren't "repaved," so they weaken and become brittle. "Muscles recover a few weeks after astronauts return to Earth," Roach writes. It can take months, however, for bones to build up again. Some studies suggest that an astronaut's weakened bones never completely recover. That's a concern for NASA, which plans to send astronauts to Mars. The round-trip journey will take two or three years. No human has ever been weightless for so long. High Costs A Mars expedition raises other health concerns too. Earth's atmosphere protects us from high-intensity radiation. Too much radiation can cause mutations, or random changes, in DNA that trigger abnormal cell growth. Cancer results. The longer you're in space, the greater the ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 6 of 12 Astral Bodies risk of DNA mutations. For that reason, NASA will probably send older astronauts to Mars. It takes 10 to 20 years for radiation damage to result in cancer. So astronauts in their 60s would be nearing the end of their natural life spans by the time cancer showed up. "There are a lot of astronauts who would sign up to go to Mars, even knowing full well the dangers," says Roach. To succeed, a Mars mission would have to be totally sustainable. Practically everything would have to be recycled. Roach tested one of NASA's sustainability solutions: recycled urine. The foul chemicals in it had been filtered by osmosis, a process in which water molecules pass through a membrane, leaving dissolved particles behind. "The resulting liquid was safe to drink-and surprisingly sweet and tasty," she writes. A mission to Mars would cost about $500 billion. To Roach, it would be worth every penny, in part because the lessons learned from it might solve problems related to waste, energy production, and water shortages on Earth. "I think we can do it," she says. "I think you'll be seeing someone go to Mars." ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 7 of 12 All the 'Buzz' All the 'Buzz' In 1969, Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin made history as the first people on the moon. Weekly Reader (WR) spoke to Buzz Aldrin about NASA's planned return to the moon, a future on Mars, and his children's book, Reaching for the Moon, which was featured at the National Book Festival in Washington, D.C. WR: What does it feel like to walk on the moon? Aldrin: You knew that you were there, but it was unreal at the same time. It's so different and unusual that it's almost dreamlike. WR: What was the most memorable part of walking on the moon? Aldrin: There are two moments that are not recorded on film. They're recorded in my mind. One was just the second or two after we shut the engine down and we realized that the spacecraft was on the moon. That really was the major achievement. When I was outside seeing the Earth, my other thought was that there were only three human beings who were not on Earth. [The third was Michael Collins, who was orbiting the moon in a craft that would take the astronauts back to Earth. ] WR: Your children's book is about following your dreams. Did you dream of being an astronaut? Aldrin: Well, there wasn't any such thing as an astronaut until about 1958 or 1959. Sputnik [the Soviet space satellite] didn't go up until 1957, so thinking of human beings in space was not at all common. WR: Will returning to the moon have the same impact as it did when you and Mr. Armstrong first set foot on the moon? Aldrin: No, I don't think there is any way you can replace that competitiveness [to reach the moon first] that existed, that pioneering spirit. The moon is a proving ground in our backyard. We've been there before, but it's preparing us to visit another planet. WR: You've been a supporter of a piloted mission to Mars. Why do you think it's so important ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 8 of 12 All the 'Buzz' that we send humans to Mars? Aldrin: Now we can send robots to Mars, but that just wouldn't satisfy the human desire to want to expand our horizons. We've always done that. I can't answer by saying that there is going to be something profitable that will be returned from Mars, other than perhaps storytelling or making movies en route. WR: Your sister gave you the name "Buzzer" when you were young-and then it got shortened to Buzz. And that stuck? Aldrin: It certainly did. It made it very recognizable and unique. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2009 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 9 of 12 Mission: Pluto Mission: Pluto Pluto is a small, icy dwarf planet in our solar system. It was kicked out of the planet family on August 24, 2006. A spacecraft called New Horizons blasted off toward Pluto in January 2006, and it flew by the former planet in 2015. The 1,054-pound spacecraft, about the size of a grand piano, got as close as 6,200 miles from Pluto's surface. When New Horizons launched, officials at NASA, the U.S. space agency, said the craft would give humans a first look at Pluto and the other objects in the Kuiper (KIGH-per) belt. The Kuiper belt is a wide band of icy and rocky objects circling the sun just beyond the orbit of Neptune. New Horizons has been mapping the objects, measuring their atmospheres, and examining their surfaces. The spacecraft has captured images and beamed them to Earth. New Class System As New Horizons zoomed ahead, the world's top astronomers voted to demote, or lower the status of, Pluto. The decision was made at a convention of the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in Prague, Czech Republic. Now there are eight "classical" planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Why did the astronomers boot Pluto from the planet family? For starters, the astronomers agreed on a new definition of a planet. A planet must be nearly round and must orbit the sun. Its orbit should not cross the orbit of another planet. Pluto's orbit crosses Neptune's path. Astronomers have long suspected that Pluto was different from the other planets. Its orbit is very elliptical (oval-shaped). It takes Pluto 248 Earth years to circle the sun. Pluto also is quite small-not even as large as Earth's moon. Orbit and size weren't the only problems. Pluto is also made up of different material from the other planets. Pluto isn't composed of just rocky material, as Earth and Mars are, or of gases, as Jupiter and Saturn are. Pluto was the only planet made mostly of ice, leading some to call it an "ice dwarf." The average temperature on Pluto's surface is -382 degrees Fahrenheit. Dwarf Planets Don't pity Pluto, though. It still has a place in space. Pluto is now one of a distinct class of smaller objects called dwarf planets. Along with Pluto, some members of the dwarf-planet category are Ceres (SIHR-eez), ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 10 of 12 Mission: Pluto the largest asteroid; and Eris, which lies beyond Pluto's orbit. More dwarf planets are expected to be announced by the IAU as more objects are discovered that fit into the category. "These dwarf planets are popping up everywhere," astronomer Alan Stern, who led the New Horizons mission, told WR News. Eris In 2003, Pluto's fate as a planet was probably sealed with the discovery of Eris, a Kuiper belt object larger than Pluto. Faced with that discovery and the possibility of discovering more large objects, astronomers began to talk about reclassifying the objects in our solar system. "We might be demoting [Pluto] from the list of eight classical planets, but we're promoting it by making it the head of its own special class," said U.S. astronomer Owen Gingerich of Harvard University, who chaired the IAU panel. Onward Mission Scientists hope that the New Horizons mission will provide clues to how our solar system was created about 4.6 billion years ago. Many scientists believe that objects in the Kuiper belt are leftovers from the formation of our solar system. Pluto's downsized rank isn't stopping scientists from studying it. "We will continue pursuing exploration of the most scientifically interesting objects in the solar system, regardless of how they are categorized," says Paul Hertz, chief scientist for NASA's Science Mission Directorate. A Look Back at Pluto Pluto was discovered in the 20th century, long after the other planets had been found. At its discovery, it was classified as a planet. It was discovered by an American, Clyde Tombaugh (1906-1997). Eleven-yearold British schoolgirl Venetia Burney suggested that the new planet be named Pluto, after the Roman god of the underworld. The name appealed to Tombaugh and others at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, where Pluto was discovered in 1930. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 11 of 12 A Stargazer's Guide to Mission Control A Stargazer's Guide to Mission Control Someone must have pulled the plug on the green computer consoles long ago. The carpet is now ratty and dirty. The room could stand a new coat of paint. When I stepped into the old Mission Control room at the Johnson Space Center in Houston recently, it made me feel as though it were 1969 again. It was one of the most important rooms in U.S. history. This was the control room the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) used when the United States sent men to the moon. This Mission Control served as the nerve center for dozens of space missions, including Edward White's first spacewalk in 1965 and the space shuttle Challenger disaster in 1986. On the walls of the room are plaques commemorating those and other NASA missions. "This room was used from the Gemini missions all the way through to the space shuttle in the early 1990s," said NASA's Gary Kitmacher, my guide for the day. The tour brought back many memories. I remember watching on my parent's first color television the black-and-white image of Neil Armstrong taking "one giant leap for mankind" as he became the first human to walk on the moon in 1969. As Armstrong made history, I could hear on TV that the scientists, who were in this very room, were whooping and hollering. A year later, I was glued to the TV again as scientists crowded around the consoles trying to figure out how to get the astronauts of Apollo 13 back home when an oxygen tank exploded aboard their craft. The next stop on the tour was the new Mission Control, where engineers keep tabs on the International Space Station (ISS) orbiting above Earth. Not far from the Mission Control building is a Saturn V rocket, the vehicle that launched NASA astronauts to the moon. The rocket looks just like a plastic model I built as a kid. But this aging ship is real and much, much bigger. Near the Saturn V is a Redstone rocket with a Mercury capsule on top. The Mercury missions were the first U.S. manned missions to space. The Redstone looks like a toy compared with the gigantic Saturn V. Also at the Johnson Space Center is an enormous building where astronauts train before heading to the ISS. The building houses models of the various components that make up the huge space station. There were two Russian cosmonauts walking around during the tour. When I was a kid, I always wanted to walk on the moon. Walking through the Johnson Space Center some 30 years later is the next best thing. ReadWorks.org Copyright © 2007 Weekly Reader Corporation. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Weekly Reader is a registered trademark of Weekly Reader Corporation. Page 12 of 12