Article-A-Day The Sun and the Earth 7 Articles Check articles you have read: Where Does the Sun's Energy Come From? 301 words A Solar Mystery 487 words What Is Space Weather? 894 words The Story of a Strange and (Solar) Stormy Night . . . 314 words Life in a Greenhouse? How Ghastly! 777 words A Cool Sun for Cool Music? 647 words What's the Sun's Mood Today? 645 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 13 Where Does the Sun's Energy Come From? Where Does the Sun's Energy Come From? The text and image are from NASA Space Place. Every 1.5 millionths of a second, the sun releases more energy than all humans consume in an entire year. Without the sun there would be no light, no warmth, and no life. Its heat influences the environments of all the planets, dwarf planets, moons, asteroids, and comets in our solar system. How does a big ball of hydrogen create all that heat? The short answer is that it is big. If it were smaller, it would be just a sphere of hydrogen, like Jupiter. But the sun is much bigger than Jupiter. It would take 433,333 Jupiters to fill it up! That's a lot of hydrogen. That means it's held together by a whole lot of gravity. And THAT means there is a whole lot of pressure inside of it. In fact, the pressure is so intense, and the density so great, that the hydrogen atoms collide with enough force that they literally meld into a new element-helium. This process-called nuclear fusion-releases energy while creating a chain reaction that allows it to occur over and over and over again. That energy builds up. It gets as hot as 15 million degrees Fahrenheit in the sun's core. The energy travels outward through a large area called the convective zone. Then it travels onward to the photosphere, where it emits heat, charged particles, and light. That heat powers the chemical reactions that make life possible on Earth, allows gases and liquids to exist on many planets and moons, and causes icy comets to form fiery halos. Those particles create a 'solar wind' that pushes against the fabric of interstellar space billions of miles away. And that light travels far out into the cosmos-just one star among billions and billions. Not too bad for a big ball of gas, no? ReadWorks.org Page 2 of 13 A Solar Mystery A Solar Mystery This text is from NASA Space Place. The Sun's Mysteriously Hot Atmosphere There are many ways in which the sun is different than Earth. For one thing, the sun is a broiling mass of superheated gas. Earth is a cool, wet planet where life flourishes. But there are some similarities. For one, both the sun and Earth have an atmosphere. On Earth, the atmosphere is a layer of gas surrounding its surface. It contains, among other things, the oxygen we breathe. On the sun, it is a wispy layer of hydrogen gas much less dense than the gas that makes up the sun's bright surface. But contained within this solar atmosphere lies one of the great mysteries in science. The largest part of the sun's atmosphere is a layer called the corona. For some reason the corona is hotter than the actual surface of the sun below it. Much hotter. Why Is the Corona So Hot? The surface of the sun is almost 10,000 degrees Fahrenheit. That's really hot. But the sun's corona is over 200 times hotter-millions of degrees Fahrenheit. That's like the actual flame of a fire being 200 times colder than the air around that fire. Why would the area around a hot burning mass be hotter than something that is actually closer to the source of heat? And if the corona is so hot, then why doesn't it heat up the sun's surface to a similar temperature? Well, the truth is that nobody knows for sure. Lots of scientists are hard at work trying to figure out the answer. One potential explanation is magnetic forces. All that superheated gas in the sun core creates a strong magnetic field-like Earth's magnetic field, but a whole lot stronger and more chaotic. Some scientists think that it is this magnetic field that gives the sun's corona energy. Are Strong Magnetic Forces to Blame? If that were true, then powerful magnetic waves would be causing atoms in the gas surrounding the sun to move very quickly. The faster the atoms in something move, the hotter it is. That's all heat is-moving atoms. It's very hard to study the sun, and scientists are still not entirely sure how magnetic force could produce heat, or why the surface of the sun is not heated by the hot corona. But that's the great thing about science-there's always some big mystery just waiting to be solved. ReadWorks.org Page 3 of 13 What Is Space Weather? What Is Space Weather? The text and images are from NASA Space Place. ... Thank goodness we only have to worry about Earth's weather, right? Wrong! Weather Within Weather Our star-the Sun-is a bubbling, boiling ball of fire... . It constantly belches out great clouds of hot gas. This gas is all charged up with electricity, too. This stuff travels at astounding speeds, some of it right toward Earth! This means that Earth's weather happens inside the Sun's weather! Thank goodness Earth's magnetic field ... and atmosphere protect us from most of this blast. Otherwise, the Sun's weather would be OUR weather. Yikes! However, we are still affected by the Sun's atmosphere and its violent activities. We call this part of our weather "space weather," because it comes to us through space from the Sun. Winds 10,000 times faster than hurricanes! The solar wind blows at about 600,000 to 2,000,000-that's two million-miles per hour! The solar wind flows around obstacles, such as planets and moons. However, if a planet has a magnetic field, as Earth does, the charged particles flow around the magnetic field. The solar wind pushes on the magnetic field, flattening it on the side facing the Sun, and pushing it out into a long tail on the opposite side... . You can't see Earth's magnetic lines of force. But if you have ever used a compass to find which way is north, you have seen one effect of these lines of force. The compass needle lines up right alongside the lines of force, which come out of the Earth's magnetic South Pole and enter Earth's magnetic North Pole... . Where Space Weather is Beautiful The solar wind follows the magnetic lines of force. Some of the charged particles flow right down into Earth's atmosphere near the Poles. When these charged particles hit Earth's ReadWorks.org Page 4 of 13 What Is Space Weather? atmosphere, they glow in beautiful shades of green and red. Notice the glow near the Poles in the Picture 3 video. We call these glowing colors the Northern Lights and Southern Lights, or the Aurora Borealis and Aurora Australis. They are beautiful curtains of light that move and sway in the night sky. Usually, you can see them only if you live somewhat close to the North or South Pole, far from the equator... . Sometimes you can see the auroras far from the North or South Poles. [There are maps that show] how likely you are on a certain day to see the Northern Lights from any location in the Northern Hemisphere. Areas colored yellow are more likely to see it than areas colored blue. Sometimes the map looks very different, with the yellow area much larger. Here It Comes! But sometimes the Sun gets extra restless. It has "solar indigestion!" These sudden and intense hiccups and burps are called solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The effects of these types of space weather are not so pretty! As a matter of fact, they can be very bad for humans and their equipment. A solar flare happens when the Sun suddenly burps out a blast of extra energy. Some of this energy is very "high-energy" energy called X-rays. CMEs are even bigger burps. CMEs are the biggest explosions in the solar system... . When all these X-rays and charged particles reach Earth, they cause trouble. Quick, Where Can We Hide? "Bad space weather" can interrupt radio signals. It can damage satellites. Ships at sea might not be able to use navigation equipment that relies on satellites. Also, their two-way radios might not work. They could get lost or run aground in shallow water. Electrical systems that bring power to our homes and business can be knocked out by this "bad space weather" too. And what about the astronauts living in the International Space Station or on a Space Shuttle mission? The Space Station and Shuttle have radiation shielding built in. But the astronauts ReadWorks.org Page 5 of 13 What Is Space Weather? certainly would not go out "space walking" during bad space weather. The extra radiation could make them sick. Even airplane crew members can be affected if they often fly over the North Pole. More radiation from space weather events comes down into the atmosphere near the Poles. If Only We Had Some Warning! Just as we need early warnings about hurricanes, tornadoes, and other bad weather, having early warnings of bad space weather helps keep damage to a minimum. That is why the GOES (short for Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite) has a Solar X-ray Imager and other instruments to measure the space environment. A new generation of satellites called the GOES-R series will have even better space weather instruments. These special telescopes can detect X-rays (which our eyes cannot)... . Every minute they take a picture of the Sun using X-rays. They give space weather forecasters information that helps them to warn others of solar events that could harm satellites and systems on the ground... . The main job of GOES and the GOES-R series is to watch what the weather is up to on Earth. Another type of satellite that monitors space weather is the POES (short for Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite)... . The POES keep an eye on Earth's climate, but also monitor the energy entering Earth's atmosphere by charged particles from the Sun... . ReadWorks.org Page 6 of 13 The Story of a Strange and (Solar) Stormy Night . . . The Story of a Strange and (Solar) Stormy Night . . . The text and images are from NASA Space Place. It is a sticky August night in Florida. Typical, except for one thing. Bright red and green curtains of light dance in the sky. Is the swamp on fire? No. The aurora borealis, or Northern Lights, are lighting up the sky. It is 1859, and few people in Florida have ever seen an aurora. They are amazed and frightened. A few days later, on September 1, English astronomer Richard C. Carrington is studying a group of sunspots (through dark filters that protect his eyes, of course). Around 11:00 AM, he sees a sudden flash of intense white light from the area of the sunspots. Seventeen hours later, the night sky in North America and as far south as Panama in Central America lights up like daytime. It is another wave of even brighter auroras. People read newspapers by the light. Gold miners in the Rocky Mountains wake up and make coffee, bacon and eggs at 1:00 AM, thinking the Sun has risen on a cloudy morning. But stranger things than these are happening. Instruments that measure changes in Earth's magnetism are acting crazy, their needles stuck against the pins at the highest end of the scale. Spikes of electricity surge into the world's telegraph systems, and no one can send a message. What is going on? In 1859, even scientists didn't understand what caused auroras and the electrical and magnetic disturbances that went with them. Eventually they figured out that auroras are caused by violent events on the Sun. These solar storms can blast out huge clouds of electrified gas and dust at up to 2 million miles per hour. If this high-energy blast of particles reaches Earth, it can temporarily distort and disrupt Earth's magnetic field. ReadWorks.org Page 7 of 13 Life in a Greenhouse? How Ghastly! Life in a Greenhouse? How Ghastly! The text and images are from NASA Space Place. A greenhouse is for growing plants. It is made of glass or clear plastic to let in lots of sunlight. But why not just put the plants outside? A greenhouse stays warmer than the air outside. Instead of cooling off at night, it traps some of the heat inside to keep the plants warm. Even in the winter, with no heat source but the Sun on a clear day, a greenhouse stays warmer than the air outside. In the summer, if a greenhouse gets too hot, the gardener can open the windows and doors and maybe turn on a fan. Greenhouse Earth? A greenhouse is terrific if all you want to do is grow heat-loving plants. But what if Earth's atmosphere started to behave like a too-hot greenhouse? Don't forget, we cannot open Earth's windows or doors to cool it off. Earth as a closed-up greenhouse would soon grow to be ghastly! If you made our Gummy Greenhouse Gas models, you may wonder why the molecules you made with gumdrops are called greenhouse gases. Here is why: If the atmosphere contains too much of these gases, the whole Earth becomes a hotter and hotter greenhouse. The atmosphere holds onto too much of the heat at night instead of letting it escape into space. Then, the next day, the Sun heats Earth's surface even more. If the atmosphere works too well as a greenhouse, each day gets a little warmer and a little warmer. We may not be able to measure this effect from day to day or even year to year. But over tens of years, a few degrees of warming starts causing changes. For example, ice melts in the North and South Pole regions. All this new liquid water raises the sea level. Cities built on coastlines could someday be under water! When the oceans get warmer, weather is affected everywhere. Some places have more severe storms and other places have hardly any rain at all. And many other changes could occur that would be bad for humans and other living things. Our Burning Desires Some of the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are caused by humans. Whenever we burn anything, such asReadWorks.org Page 8 of 13 Life in a Greenhouse? How Ghastly! á gasoline in our cars and trucks, á jet fuel in our planes, á coal in our factories or powerplants, á trees to clear the land for farming -we pollute our atmosphere with carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide. Although carbon monoxide does not act as a greenhouse gas, it is poisonous to breathe. Our livestock (cows, pigs, and chickens, for example) also pollute the atmosphere with methane from their digestion process. Ozone is made when the Sun cooks carbon monoxide, such as from our car and truck exhaust, with other chemicals in the atmosphere. Good Ozone, Bad Ozone In the case of ozone, it's all about location, location, location. Scientists have divided the atmosphere into different layers, each with a name. The layer closest to the ground, where we live and fly in jets, is called the troposphere [TRO-po-sphere]. Above that layer is the stratosphere [STRAT-o-sphere], which goes to about 30 miles high. (Three more layers above that have names too, but we won't talk about those right now. ) ReadWorks.org Page 9 of 13 A Cool Sun for Cool Music? A Cool Sun for Cool Music? This text is from NASA Space Place. We learn about the world by slicing it up into smaller pieces. We study history, geography, math, art, music, science, and lots of other subjects. But to really understand our world, we must reconnect the pieces to see how they all work together. This is a story about connections. This is a story about how events on the Sun 300 years ago may have affected some of the beautiful music we still hear today. In the 17th century (1644 to 1737) lived a violin maker named Antonio Stradivari. His workshop was in Cremona, Italy. He made hundreds of violins, many of which are still played today. They are prized for their rich and beautiful sound, especially in the hands of master violinists. No one has since been able to make a violin that sounds quite like a Stradivarius (a violin made by Stradivari). Just how did Stradivari make such wonderful violins? No one knows for sure, but one new idea makes a lot of sense. Violins are made from wood. The best violins are made from very hard, dense wood. The best wood comes from trees that have grown very slowly, laying down a thin ring of dense new growth each year. Long winters and cool summers make for slow tree growth. During about 1560-1850, which included the time Stradivari made his violins, Europe (including Italy) experienced a "Little Ice Age." It was so cold that normally free-flowing rivers and canals froze over. Stradivari used the hard, dense wood from the spruce trees growing during this time in a nearby forest to make his violins. Why so cold? But why did Europe get so much colder than normal during these years? Only recently did scientists make the connection and figure out the most likely answer. Astronomers have been studying the Sun for hundreds of years. Using very special dark filters and lenses, they have studied the most obvious feature on the ReadWorks.org Page 10 of 13 A Cool Sun for Cool Music? Sun: Sunspots. Sunspots are areas of particularly strong magnetic forces on the Sun's surface. They appear darker than their surroundings because they are cooler. Even so, scientists have discovered that when there are lots of sunspots, the Sun is actually putting out MORE energy than when there are fewer sunspots. Sunspot activity occurs in cycles of about 11 years. But during about 1645 to 1715, hardly any sunspots were seen! From the time sunspot records were first kept until now, such a "solar rest period" has not been seen. It was during this period that Europe experienced the "Little Ice Age." It was during this time that Stradivari came along and made possibly the best violins ever from the slow-growing trees of his chilly era. So, that is how the Sun of 300 years ago made beautiful music that we can still hear today! ReadWorks.org Page 11 of 13 What's the Sun's Mood Today? What's the Sun's Mood Today? This text is from NASA Space Place. The Solar Cycle The Sun's core is made of dense, electrically charged gas called plasma. This roiling, boiling plasma generates the Sun's powerful magnetic field. Earth has a magnetic field too. Like Earth's magnetic field, the Sun's magnetic field has a north pole and a south pole. However, unlike Earth, on the Sun the magnetic field is complicated-you might even say messy! About every 11 years, the Sun's magnetic field does a flip. In other words, the north pole becomes the south pole, and the south pole becomes the north pole. The Sun also does something else every 11 years. Its storminess builds up to a maximum, then it settles back down to a minimum. This repeated behavior is called the solar cycle. When the Sun is the most stormy, that's when its magnetic field flips. Scientists are not sure what the storminess has to do with the magnetic field flipping, if anything. Sunspots Sunspots are areas of very strong magnetic forces on the Sun's surface. They look darker than their surroundings because they are cooler. Even so, when there are lots of sunspots, the Sun is actually putting out MORE energy than when there are fewer sunspots. During solar maximum, there are the most sunspots, and during solar minimum, the fewest. Solar Flares Solar flares happen because of the constantly moving magnetic fields in the Sun's atmosphere. As the Sun approaches solar maximum (the most active part of its 11-year cycle), its magnetic fields become messier and messier. The magnetic fields loop around, and cross over each other, cutting each other off, and reconnecting. Have you ever tried sprinkling iron filings on a bar magnet? The iron filings line up along the magnetic lines of force. See the picture in the sidebar above. Similarly, the hot plasma on the Sun's surface is at the mercy of the magnetic lines of force. Sometimes the plasma gets disconnected from the magnetic fields when the fields come ReadWorks.org Page 12 of 13 What's the Sun's Mood Today? together. Then particles in the hot plasma can speed up greatly and send powerful radiation into space. This is a solar flare. When the solar cycle is at a minimum, active regions are small and rare and solar flares do not occur very often. They occur more often as the Sun gets near the maximum part of its cycle. Coronal Mass Ejections Sometimes, the Sun throws off huge amounts of matter. These events are called coronal mass ejections, or CMEs. A CME can release up to 20 billion tons of this material! If that material were rock, it would make a mountain roughly 2-3/4 miles across and almost 1/2 mile high! The material thrown off by the Sun can travel a million or more miles per hour (500 km/second). Solar flares and CMEs are the biggest, most violent "explosions" in our solar system, releasing the power of around one billion hydrogen bombs! Fast CMEs occur more often near the peak of the 11-year solar cycle. CMEs can trigger major upsets in Earth's magnetosphere. The Sun can eject matter in any direction, and very few of the CMEs will actually run into Earth. ReadWorks.org Page 13 of 13