Article-A-Day Our Amazing Universe 7 Articles Check articles you have read: Space Volcanoes! 137 words Different Types of Galaxies 342 words Black Hole Rescue 585 words Where Does Interstellar Space Begin? 288 words The Sounds of "Empty" Space 572 words What Is a Satellite Galaxy? 442 words This Is How Orbits Work! 345 words © 2024ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. Page 1 of 10 Space Volcanoes! Space Volcanoes! This text is from NASA Space Place. For years, most scientists figured that Jupiter's moon Io didn't have a lot going on. Many moons are 'geologically dead.' That means that they don't have things like earthquakes, newly forming mountains, or volcanoes. But it turns out, these scientists were dead wrong about Io. NASA's Voyager 1 spacecraft took the first close up pictures of Io in 1979. The pictures showed a massive plume erupting from its surface into space. Not only did Io have volcanoes -they were active! This was the first time an erupting volcano had been found anywhere besides Earth. There are volcanoes all around our solar system. But only a few places besides Earth-like some of the moons of Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune-have active ones today. Use the Space Volcano Explorer to learn more about our solar system's many volcanoes. ReadWorks.org Page 2 of 10 Different Types of Galaxies Different Types of Galaxies The text and images are from NASA Space Place. Dear Galactic Explorer, Your mission is to safely fly your spacecraft on a journey. You'll want to visit as many galaxies as possible. A galaxy is a huge collection of gas, dust, and billions of stars all held together by gravity. All galaxies are made up of these same things. However, they come in many different shapes and sizes. Here are a few types of galaxies you might see out your window as you're jetting through the universe: Spiral galaxies look like giant pinwheels. The arms of the pinwheel are made up of stars and lots of gas and dust. Gas and dust are some of the main ingredients needed to form new stars. Young stars burn much hotter than older stars, so spiral galaxies are often some of the brightest in the universe. About 20% of all galaxies are spirals. Our home galaxy, the Milky Way, is a very good example of one. Elliptical galaxies are shaped like stretched-out circles, or ellipses. Some elliptical galaxies are more stretched out than others. One might look almost perfectly circular. Another one might look long and flat. Elliptical galaxies contain mostly older stars. That means they often aren't as bright as spiral galaxies. They also have very little dust and gas. Elliptical galaxies are the largest and most common galaxies observed. They make up about 60% of all galaxies. Irregular galaxies are just that: irregular. They don't have a single common shape. Irregular galaxies are among the smallest galaxies scientists have observed. However, they can also be very bright. Like spiral galaxies, irregular galaxies are often filled with gas, dust, and lots of bright young stars. About 20% of all galaxies are irregular galaxies. And one word of warning, explorer: be on the lookout for quasars! Quasars are compact areas in the center of a galaxy. They give off enormous amounts of energy. Quasars are actually some of the brightest objects in the universe. Just don't fly towards the quasars. They can damage your spacecraft! Stay safe, good luck, and enjoy your journey! ReadWorks.org Page 3 of 10 Black Hole Rescue Black Hole Rescue This text is from NASA Space Place. What are black holes anyway? Black holes are not really holes at all. They are the opposite of empty! Black holes have the most matter stuffed into the least space of any objects in the universe. Because they are so compact, they have very strong gravity. Here on Earth, gravity is what makes things fall down, rather than just float away, when you let go of them. Gravity is what you are measuring when you step on a scale to weigh yourself. Your weight is the amount of force that Earth's gravity exerts on you. The more matter your body contains, the more you weigh. Likewise, the more matter an object has, the stronger its gravity. The gravity of a black hole is so strong that not even light can escape. Even if a bright star is shining right next to a black hole, you cannot see the black hole. Instead of reflecting the light as other objects do, the black hole just swallows the starlight forever. Any matter that gets too close to a black hole gets swallowed up as well. There are at least two kinds of black holes. One kind is called a stellar-mass black hole. You can think of it as a "one-big-star" black hole. This type of black hole forms when a big star burns up all its fuel and explodes (called a supernova). Then what's left collapses into a super-compact object-a black hole. Stars must contain quite a bit more matter than our Sun for this to happen. So our Sun, and most stars, will never become black holes. Stellar-mass black holes are only a few tens of kilometers across-maybe about 40 miles. Just imagine. Our Sun is so huge that about one million Earths would fit inside it. A star with enough matter to become a black hole contains maybe 10 times as much matter as the Sun. Now imagine a star with that much matter, shrinking into a space no farther across than the distance you can drive a car in less than one hour! Another kind of black hole is called a supermassive black hole. You can think of this type as a "million-big-star" black hole, because it contains as much matter as one million to 100 million Suns! Astronomers think that supermassive black holes are lurking at the centers of galaxies, ReadWorks.org Page 4 of 10 Black Hole Rescue including our own Milky Way galaxy. They don't know yet how these humongous black holes are formed. Learning More About Black Holes Scientists really want to learn more about black holes and other strange and massive objects in the Universe. One space mission that is helping them do just that is a space telescope called XMM-Newton. It was launched into Earth orbit in 1999 by NASA and the European Space Agency. It observes the universe in high-energy x-rays, a type of light that we can't see with our eyes. Matter, such as gas and dust particles, near black holes puts out x-rays as it swirls around at light speed just before the black hole swallows it up. By observing these x-rays, XMM can help scientists understand the black hole. ReadWorks.org Page 5 of 10 Where Does Interstellar Space Begin? Where Does Interstellar Space Begin? The text and images are from NASA Space Place. What is interstellar space? At first glance, the answer seems simple. 'Inter' means between. 'Stellar' refers to stars. "Easy!" you think, "Interstellar space is the part of space that exists between stars." Not so fast! Wouldn't that pretty much mean that all of space is interstellar space? For interstellar space to be something different, then there must be some defined boundary between the space near a star and the space in between stars. But what is that boundary? Look to the solar wind! Scientists define the beginning of interstellar space as the place where the sun's constant flow of material and magnetic field stop affecting its surroundings. This place is called the heliopause. It marks the end of a region created by our sun that is called the heliosphere. The sun creates this heliosphere by sending a constant flow of particles and a magnetic field out into space at over 670,000 miles per hour. This stream is called the 'solar wind.' Like Earth wind, this wind pushes against the stuff around it. What it pushes against are particles from other stars. -pretty much anything that doesn't come from our own solar system. How would we know when we've arrived in interstellar space? When it comes to the sun it's all about detecting the concentration and temperature of the particles around you. Inside the heliosphere, the solar particles are hot but less concentrated. Outside of the bubble, they are very much colder but more concentrated. Once you arrive in interstellar space, there would be an increase of "cold" particles around you. There would also be a magnetic field that does not originate from our sun. Welcome to interstellar space! ReadWorks.org Page 6 of 10 The Sounds of "Empty" Space The Sounds of "Empty" Space The text and images are from NASA Space Place. Imagine nothing. Are you picturing empty space? Guess what? Space is not nothing! ... [T]he great scientist Albert Einstein said that space curves around mass. So if space can be curved, it must be "something," rather than nothing. How weird is that? According to Einstein, the curvature of space by mass creates gravity. For example, the Sun is a huge mass. It curves the space around it for billions of miles. The planets that orbit the Sun are really just following the curvature in space created by the mass of the Sun. Many experiments have supported this idea. Going a Step Further ... When a big boat moves through water, the water has to get out of the way to make space for the boat. The water has to curve around the boat! When the water moves out of the way, it makes ripples or waves on the surface. Like a boat moving through water, massive objects moving through space make ripples or waves in space. A massive star or black hole moving through space causes waves in space. We call these waves gravitational waves. [...] As we gaze at a starry sky on a quiet night, we cannot imagine all the violence taking place out there. We do not hear even a whisper of the massive black holes that may be orbiting closer and closer to each other in a violent death spiral. We do not hear a massive star exploding in a supernova at the end of its life. But these violent events create intense gravitational waves. ReadWorks.org Page 7 of 10 The Sounds of "Empty" Space [...] And these waves can be interpreted as sounds of a sort too-the kinds of "sounds" carried through space itself by the gravitational waves. [...] A Mission to "Hear" Gravitational Waves No one has yet detected a gravitational wave. Gravitational waves are very, very weak by the time they reach us from some far distant event. But scientists are very close to having instruments precise enough to sense these faint ripples in space. LIGO is a mission to detect gravitational waves. LIGO stands for Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory. Unlike the LISA (the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna) mission to detect gravitational waves from space, LIGO will detect the waves from Earth's surface. LIGO has two observatory locations: one in Washington state and one in Louisiana. Each observatory has two long arms at right angles. Each arm is exactly the same length. Inside each arm is a long tube with a laser beam shining from one end to the other. Very precise instruments detect the slightest change in the length of the arms. A gravitational wave passing by will make one arm longer and one shorter, then the other way around, and so on. The difference could be as small as 1/1000th the width of a proton-one of the tiny particles inside an atom! Scientists need both LIGO and LISA to study the objects and events that create gravitational waves. If gravitational waves were sound waves, LIGO hears the high notes and LISA hears the low notes. LIGO and LISA each "hear" a different size of gravitational wave, which are created by different types of violent space events. LIGO will study pairs of very dense neutron stars that orbit each other and smaller black holes. LISA will study much more massive black holes found in the centers of galaxies like our Milky Way. ReadWorks.org Page 8 of 10 What Is a Satellite Galaxy? What Is a Satellite Galaxy? This text is from NASA Space Place. Our sun is part of a massive collection of stars in the Milky Way galaxy. These hundreds of billions of stars orbit the galaxy's center. But did you know that there are things that are even bigger orbiting the Milky Way's center? Other galaxies orbit it too! These less massive galaxies have their own impressive collection of stars, which all orbit their own center; but the galaxies and everything in them orbit our galaxy too. It's as if our galaxy is the sun and those other galaxies are planets. Astronomers call them "satellite galaxies." Where Are They and What Are They Like? The Milky Way has a number of satellite galaxies, but the biggest one is the Large Magellanic Cloud. It is about 163,000 light-years away and around 1/100th the size of the Milky Way. Unlike our spiral galaxy, this one lacks a clean spiral shape. Some scientists think that is because the Milky Way and other galaxies are pulling and warping it. In terms of distance, there are two contenders for closest satellite galaxy. One group of stars is small enough that astronomers consider it a "dwarf galaxy." The other group is so close that they still debate whether or not it is part of our galaxy or its own dwarf galaxy. Astronomers have named the one that everyone agrees on the Sagittarius Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy. It's about 50,000 light-years away from the Milky Way center. It orbits over the top and down below the disk of our galaxy, like a ring over a spinning top. But there is something even closer to our Milky Way-a cluster of stars named by some to be the Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy. Scientists estimate that it contains around a billion stars. It is so close to the edge of the Milky Way that it is closer to our solar system than to our galaxy's center. It's about 25,000 light-years away from us. Where Does One Galaxy Start and the Other End? Some scientists don't think the Canis Major cluster of stars is actually its own galaxy or dwarf galaxy. Instead they think it is just a dense area of faraway stars that are still part of the Milky Way. Either way, it is clear that this bunch of stars has been pulled very close to our Milky Way by our galaxy's massive gravity. Over time, this could be the fate of other satellite galaxies in the area. They could all one day merge into an even larger Milky Way galaxy! ReadWorks.org Page 9 of 10 This Is How Orbits Work! This Is How Orbits Work! The text and image are from NASA Space Place. Isaac Newton was a great scientist and mathematician who lived more than 300 years ago. He understood and wrote about many of the laws of motion that we see at work every day. To explain how one body can orbit another, he asked his readers to imagine a cannon on top of a very, VERY tall mountain. (Our cannon is on a very tall, imaginary lifter that goes up and down, but it is the same idea. ) The cannon is loaded with gunpowder and fired. The cannonball follows a curve, falling faster and faster as a result of Earth's gravity, and hits the Earth at some distance away. What if we use more gunpowder? Here's what might happen: (Note that these amounts of gunpowder are just imaginary, not meant to be precise! Also, we are ignoring the fact that the air would cause drag on the cannonball and slow it down. ) Amount of Gunpowder What Happens 2 bags of gunpowder: Cannonball goes faster and gets farther before gravity pulls it back to Earth. 3 bags of gunpowder: Cannonball is going so fast that it falls all the way around the world. It is in orbit! 4 bags of gunpowder: Cannonball orbits Earth again, but goes even higher at the peak of its arc. 5 bags of gunpowder: Cannonball is going so fast it completely escapes Earth's gravity and heads out into space, maybe to an asteroid or Mars or Jupiter! The same thing happens when the Space Shuttle or a satellite is launched into orbit. The rocket boosts the spacecraft up to the height of a "very tall mountain" and also gives the spacecraft its forward speed, like the gunpowder gives the cannonball. So the spacecraft just falls all the way around the Earth, never hitting the surface. The curve of the spacecraft's path is about the same as the curve of Earth's surface. So astronauts orbiting Earth aren't really weightless, they are just falling ... and falling, and falling! How orbits work depends on basic laws of physics, as Newton described them. ReadWorks.org Page 10 of 10