The White Desert The White Desert by ReadWorks Paul and his twin brother, Steve McCrae, had read about people who lived in the Sahara Desert, but they didn't know exactly what that meant. Who were these people? Did they eat cacti? Did they spend all day surfing on the sand dunes? Where did they find water, since they lived in one of the driest regions of the entire world? And what about electricity for television and iPods? Where did the mothers deliver their babies, if there weren't any hospitals in the desert? They had so many questions! The boys studied hard to learn more about the Sahara Desert. In their 8th grade social studies class, they looked at maps and photographs of it and were astonished at how gigantic it was. The yellow color that represented the dry, arid climate covered all of North Africa, from as far west as Morocco all the way to Egypt on the northeastern coast. The only thing the twins could think of that went all the way from one coast to another in the United States was Highway Route 50, and that was something totally different! Paul and Steve did a lot of research about the deserts of North Africa at home, too. Their mother had bought them a globe which they loved to spin around to see how the colors-the green, blue, yellow and brown patches-became one big blur. During one of their after-school observations, they noticed that the map of the United States was about the same size as the Sahara Desert. They rushed to show their mother, who was painting in her studio. She was proud of them for being so careful and deliberate in their analysis of a part of the world so far away from home. "You're in for a treat," she said to them. "Your father and I have been interested in a desert in Africa, in the country of Egypt. We were thinking of visiting over the summer for an art project I'm working on. Let's make it a family vacation, and you can see what a desert is like, all for yourself." Steve and Paul couldn't believe it! "Yes, please!" they said. Their parents booked a trip to Egypt for summer vacation, and the boys counted down the days until they could visit. They whispered to each other after bedtime about all the discoveries they would make. Paul asked out loud what Steve had been thinking to himself: "What kind of art project could Mom be working on in a desert?" "I guess we'll find out once we get there," Steve replied. ReadWorks.org á © 2014 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. The White Desert Once they got to Cairo, they took a long bus ride to Bahariyya, about two hundred miles away, southeast from the capital. Their faces were glued to the window the entire ride, watching the tall, painted buildings and slender, domed mosques become shorter and shorter until they were driving through the countryside, with just a few houses and trees and bushes dotting the landscape. Their father dozed off because of the jetlag, while their mother whipped through pages of her sketchbook, drawing whatever she saw outside the window. By the time they got to the village of Bahariyya it was evening and the weather had cooled slightly. A hot breeze blew around them, whipping up little swirls of sand, which amused the boys. Now they felt like they were stepping foot on Egyptian desert soil. The driver stretched and helped himself to cups of tea, while Paul, Steve and their parents walked around, breathing in the dry air and leaving sneaker prints all over the sand. "There's plenty more sand where we're going," Paul said to Steve. "And hopefully sand dunes that we can surf on, too!" Steve replied with a grin on his face. Their mother was excited too. As the artist in the family, she had specifically chosen the Black and White Desert in Egypt for the family to visit because of all the natural sculptures it contained. Paul, Steve and their parents got into a four-by-four, doorless jeep. Its tires were large and covered in treads. Two local villagers climbed into the front with them. "These Bedouin tribesmen are our guides," their mother said. "They will drive us into the White Desert and show us around. They know every single sand dune around for miles." Both the men had beards and curly hair, and their eyes were bright and large. They smiled at the boys. "My name is Zayed," the one at the wheel said. "It's an Arabic name. It means 'abundant.' My brother here, his name is Fahd. In Arabic, that means 'panther. '" Steve was shy, but Paul was not, so he spoke up. "I'm Paul, and this is my brother Steve. We're twins. But we're not named after animals." Zayed laughed. "That's alright," he said. "In the desert, everyone becomes an animal. You have to be alert like a panther and use your eyes, ears, and nose carefully so that the desert doesn't trap you." ReadWorks.org á © 2014 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. The White Desert Steve gave his brother a nervous look. Fahd caught it in the rearview mirror. "Don't worry, brother," he said to Steve. "I'm the panther for your whole family. I'll keep us all safe." They bumped and bounced their way over a gravelly road, and were soon speeding through the desert. They drove up and down sand dunes and it felt as if they were on a boat at sea, riding wave after wave. "It feels like we're in the ocean," Paul shouted to the Bedouins over the din of the jeep. "That's right," Zayed replied. "And isn't it funny-there's no water around for miles and miles." Almost out of nowhere, the sand dunes disappeared and in their place were what looked like marble statues! For a moment, Steve wasn't sure if he was dreaming, or if he had teleported into a museum back in New York City. His twin brother must have thought the same thing because he tapped his mother on the shoulder and pointed her toward the rocks outside his window. "Look!" he said. "Aren't they beautiful?" she asked him. "What are they? Why are there statues in the desert?" Paul hadn't read about anything like this in his textbooks. "Welcome to the White Desert," Fahd announced. "What is the White Desert?" the boys asked in unison. Zayed slowed the jeep down and their mother pointed her sketching pencil at the various formations, describing the different shapes. They looked like mushrooms, animals, and totem poles. And because they were so white, they looked like snowmen, too. "Imagine that," Steve thought to himself, "a snowman in the desert! "Why is the sand so white here?" Steve asked. "It isn't actually sand," their mother replied. "Historically, thousands of years ago, this used to be ocean, not land." She went on to explain that the ocean dried up, leaving behind limestone ReadWorks.org á © 2014 ReadWorks¨, Inc. All rights reserved. The White Desert rock. In such a dry place, with no trees and bushes, the wind whipped through the rock and carved statues out of it. "Limestone," Steve said out loud. Hadn't he learned something about limestone in science class? As usual, Paul was thinking the same thing. "Isn't that the same as chalk?" he asked. "That's right!" their mother said. "Chalk is one form of limestone, like the chalk your teachers use to write on the blackboard." "We should take one of these statues back to New York City with us," Steve said. "This way Mrs. Zapicchi will never run out of chalk during social studies class!" 