Working Outdoors with Wildlife Working Outdoors with Wildlife Text and image provided courtesy of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. Some people look for a job where they work outdoors as much as possible. To be a wildlife biologist, you must like to spend time outdoors. You also need to like science, especially biology. And you might also need a sense of adventure! In Idaho, the Mule Deer Foundation is a group with lots of adventurous people. Volunteers and workers in the group track mule deer to better understand their habits. Mule deer live in the Rocky Mountain region of North America. They are a species of large deer, with big ears. One of the ways to study these animals is with radio collars. But these radios don't play music. They send information to the researchers who are studying the animals! How do people put a radio collar on a mule deer? First, the research crew finds a herd of mule deer by flying in a helicopter. Then, volunteers jump out of the helicopter, set up a giant net, and hide. The helicopter pilot guides the herd of mule deer to the net. Then, one crew member leaps from their hiding place, grabs a mule deer, and holds it on the ground. Another volunteer adds a blindfold to the mule deer to calm it down and protect its face. The volunteer attaches an ear tag, weighs the animal, measures it, and then puts on a radio collar. As soon as the volunteers let go of the mule deer, it runs back to its herd. The researchers can then learn about the habits of the mule deer by studying information from the collar. The collar tracks the deer's location and other information. Jessie Shallow is a wildlife biologist who started her career by volunteering to tag mule deer. Shallow grew up on a potato farm in Idaho. She loved animals and studied biology in college. Then, she became a wilderness river guide. She helped people travel through whitewater rapids on a raft. One of her co-workers invited her to try something new. He was working with a research crew to study mule deer and asked her to help. She was one of the volunteers who held the mule deer in place while it was tagged and collared! The radio collars send signals during the day. When the signal stops moving, researchers know that either the animal has died, or the collar has fallen off. Then, they can track the signal to find the collar. Shallow has hiked as far as 26 miles to collect collars. She carried camping equipment and spent the night in the wilderness! After working with mule deer for a few years, Shallow had an idea. She wanted to understand more about mule deer migration and what they like to eat. The Mule Deer Foundation agreed ReadWorks.org © 2022 National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Working Outdoors with Wildlife to sponsor a research project. Thanks to information from the radio collars, she collected scat samples to learn more about the animals. What is scat? It's another word for poop. When scat is analyzed in a laboratory, researchers can learn about an animal. Jessie learned which mule deer were pregnant. She learned what foods mule deer eat and what keeps them healthy. Her research showed that the most important plants for mule deer are bitterbrush and sagebrush. Today her job as a wildlife biologist is different. She still loves to work outside, but she does much more than that. She spends time with landowners and students. She teaches others about the importance of wildlife and the land. She brings together partners to protect wildlife, including the mule deer, and to make the land better. Much of this work helps animals that migrate, like mule deer. Ranchers are changing their fences so mule deer and other wildlife can travel more easily. Shallow also works on projects to remove invasive plants like cheatgrass and replant sagebrush after wildfires. This helps migrating animals and mule deer, too. A wildlife biologist works outdoors and indoors. They learn about animals and their environment. They plan research projects and learn how to protect the land. They help people and wildlife live near each other safely. Would you want to be a wildlife biologist some day? ----- These conservation efforts are supported by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF), which specializes in bringing together individuals, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and corporations to restore our nation's fish, wildlife, plants, and habitats for current and future generations. 